# Warm-up
## :wrench: Print binary representation of positive number

Print `argv[1]` in binary (assume it is a correct positive decimal number
that will fit `unsigned int`) to standard output.
Note that `printf`(3) does not have a conversion specifier for it (unlike 'x'
for hexa and 'o' for octal).  Limit the input to positive `int`s.

Do not use bit operators even if you know how to (ie. do NOT use `>>` etc.)

Implement the functionality in `void binprint(int)` and call it from `main()`.

To verify, use bc(1) with `obase=2`.  E.g.:

```
$ bc
obase=2
10
1010
255
11111111
2^31-1
1111111111111111111111111111111

$ ./a.out 2147483647
1111111111111111111111111111111
$ ./a.out 255
11111111
$ ./a.out 348508345
10100110001011101000010111001
```

You can also use `obase=8`, `obase=16`, etc.  Note that bc(1) takes only capital
letters as digits, ie. use "E4" for 0xe4, not "e4".  "e4" is treated as a
variable:

```
$ bc
ibase=16
obase=2
e4
0
E4
11100100
```

:key: [print-in-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/solutions/print-in-binary.c)


# From 11 in 2025, run out of time in 11.
# The `typedef` keyword

Note that a `char`, signed and unsigned integer types, and the floating types
are collectively called *basic types*.

We also have *derived types* - an array type, a structure, a union, a function
type, and a pointer type.

With `typedef`, you create new data type **names** for **existing** types.  Note
that you **never** create new data **types** with `typedef`.  In other words,
with `typedef`, you create synonyms to the existing types.

`typedef` is most commonly used for derived types but many type names provided
by the C standard itself are based on basic types.  For example, `size_t`, see
its definition in `/usr/include/sys/types.h`.

You can also create new type names using type names you created before, see
below.

`typedef` is used as follows:

```C
typedef int myint;
typedef char *mycharptr;

mycharptr p = "my string";
```

`typedef` is great to create complex type names in small steps.  As we will
see next.

```C
typedef char **array[10];
array a;
```

:eyes: [derived-types.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/derived-types.c)

The convention is to add `_t` to a new type name.  For example:

```C
typedef struct mystruct_s {
	int a;
	char c;
} mystruct_t;
```

And you can use it like this:

```C
struct mystruct_s x;
mystruct_t y;
```

`x` and `y` are of the same type.

:eyes: [typedef.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/typedef.c)

:wrench: Take the binary tree implementation and use `typedef` for the node
structure itself and also for the callback.


# Bitwise operations

Bitwise operators are as follows:

Operator | Meaning
--- | ---
`&`	| bitwise AND
`\|`	| bitwise OR
`^`	| bitwise XOR
`<<`	| left shift
`>>`	| right shift
`~`	| one's complement (unary)

Note, individual bits are being processed.  I.e.:

```
316 & 978			-> convert to binary to see it
100111100 & 1111010010		-> do logical AND bit by bit now

0100111100
1111010010
----------
0100010000	== 272 (use ibase=2 with bc(1) to verify)
```

So,

```
((338 & 978) == 272).	// == is of higher prority than &
```

When shifting to the left, the lower bits are filled with zeroes.

When shifting to the right, it depends on the signedness of the number.
For unsigned values the upper bits are filled with zeroes.
If the number is signed and negative (i.e. starts with bit 1 in two's complement
representation), the behavior is implementation dependent.
Usually the value it is _sign-extended_, i.e. filled with 1's.

:eyes: [left-right-shift.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/left-right-shift.c)

## Common uses of bitwise operators:

```C
n = n & 01777;			// zero out some highest bits

/*
 * Setting individual flags.  Note that each of the flags has
 * just one bit set.
 */
#define	LIGHT_OFF	0x0000
#define	LIGHT_GREEN	0x0001
#define	LIGHT_RED	0x0002
#define	LIGHT_BLUE	0x0004
#define	LIGHT_YELLOW	0x0008
#define	LIGHT_VIOLET	0x0010
#define	LIGHT_WHITE	0x0020
// ...

lights = lights | LIGHT_YELLOW;	// turn on yellow light
lights = lights & ~LIGHT_RED;	// turn off red light
```

Another common case is to use an integer type to store multiple kinds of
information, with mask to extract the parts. Here, a `unsigned short` type
stores the byte value and associated flags:

```C
#define	VALUE_MASK	0xff
#define	FLAG_MASK	0xff00

#define	ONE		0x0100
#define	TWO		0x0200

unsigned short n = 16 | ONE | TWO;

if ((n & FLAG_MASK) & ONE)
	printf("ONE\n");

printf("%hhu\n", n & VALUE_MASK);
```

## Binary operators and integer promotion

When working with bitwise operators, operands are promoted the same way
as we learned in
[Conversions and promotions](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/arithmetic-promotion-and-conversions.md)

That means:

```
13U & -1				-> promote int (-1) to unsigned,
					   i.e.  promote -1 to unsigned.
					   You get:

13 & 4294967295				-> now convert to binary
1101 & 11111111111111111111111111111111	-> the result clearly is 1101
```

:eyes: [conv-and-prom-with-bitwise-ops.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/conv-and-prom-with-bitwise-ops.c)

:wrench: Task: rewrite `print-in-binary.c` using bitwise operators

:wrench: Task: count 1 bits in a number (`argv[1]`).

:key: [count-1-bits.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/solutions/count-1-bits.c)

```
$ ./a.out 337
4
$ ./a.out 13375
9
```

# bitwise operators vs. logical operators vs. comparison

Bit operators have lower precedence than comparison.  As a consequence the
evaluation of expressions such as `(a & b == c & d)` is counter intuitive.

:eyes: [bitwise-vs-logical.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitwise-vs-logical.c)

In this case modern compilers (clang) will actually warn about missing
parentheses.

You can read the explaination by Dennis Ritchie here:
http://www.lysator.liu.se/c/dmr-on-or.html


## :wrench: Warm-up: bit difference

Task: write a program that counts the number of bits that need to be flipped so
      that number A becomes number B.

Note: use the character representation only for debug prints. The actual
      operations with the numbers are to be done with bit operations on
      integers.

Note: consider only positive integers, assume `int`.

:key: [bitdiff.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/solutions/bitdiff.c)

Sub-task for home: flip those bits and verify that the numbers are the same.

## :wrench: alternating bits detection

Task: detect if binary representation of an `unsigned int` has alternating bits
in the whole width of the type.  (e.g. `01010101` if the type was `char`).

The answer from the program will be yes/no (printed to standard output).

Start with naive/straightforward implementation, i.e. traverse all the bits
(O(n) time) and use bit operations/arithmetics.

Note: this can be done in O(1) time by comparing the value with 2 constants.

:key: [altbits.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/solutions/altbits.c)

## :wrench: Number of bits for binary representation

Given an `int` (assume 4 bytes) with a positive value, use bit operators to find
out how many bits (and bytes) will be needed to represent the number in binary.
Then rewrite
:eyes: [print-in-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/print-in-binary.c)
using the acquired number.

Note: be careful about little vs big endian

:key: [numchars-for-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/solutions/numchars-for-binary.c)


# Reading complex declarations

To read a complex declaration, you use
[operator priorities](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/operator-precedence.md)
and watch for parentheses.

```C
char **argv
```

`argv` is a pointer to a pointer to `char`

```C
int (*a)[10]
```

`a` is a pointer to an array of 10 `int`s

```C
int *a[10]
```

`a` is an array of 10 pointers to `int`

```C
void *myfunc()
```

`myfunc` is a function returning a pointer to `void`

```C
void (*myfunc)()
```

`myfunc` is a pointer to a function returning `void`

```C
char (*(*x())[])()
```

`x` is a function returning pointer to an array of pointers to a function
returning a `char`

```C
char (*(*x[3])())[5]
```

`x` is an array of 3 pointers to a function returning a pointer to an
array of 5 `char`s

## How to read it

1. find the identifier (non keyword or custom type) of a variable or function
2. start decoding:
  - left to right
  - `)`  => reverse decoding direction
  - `()` => denotes function
  - `[]` => array
  - `;`  => reverse the direction
  - when reading from right to left, we can hit:
    - `(`   => reverse the direction
    - `*`   => pointer
    - type identifier => starts the whole definition

Example:
```C
char *(*(**foo[][8])())[];
```

You can mentally simplify as:

```C
char *(*SOME_FUNCTION)[];
```

Where `SOME_FUNCTION` is `(**foo[][8])()`

Read as:

`foo` is an array of arrays of 8 pointers to a pointer to a function
returning a pointer to an array of pointers to a `char`.

Alternatively, you can do it via two simpler steps:

```C
typedef char *a_of_p[];
typedef a_of_p *(**foo[][8])();
```

:eyes: [complex-declaration.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/complex-declaration.c)

:wrench: Practice:

```C
int *(*(*fp1)(int))[10];
char (*(*x())[])()
double *f()[]           // this is not legal in C as a function cannot
                        // return an array
```


# Linking objects

Larger programs are often split into many source code files. One can create the
binary as follows:

```
cc -o binary foo.c bar.c ...
```

and it will work however the files will be compiled every time even though they
were not changed.

To save time the files are usually compiled individually and then linked into
the binary using a _runtime linker_ (sometimes called a _link editor_, or just a
*linker*), a program usually called `ld`. This program also takes care of adding
dependencies on dynamic libraries to the resulting binary, performing
relocations (for relative addressing), etc.

It works like this (assuming all source code files changed):

```
cc -c foo.c
cc -c bar.c
...
cc -o binary foo.o bar.o ...
```

Do not confuse the runtime linker with *dynamic linker*, usually called
`ld.so`. See its manual page for more information.

Note that the program `ld` was not invoked directly, it is the compiler that
serves as an `ld` wrapper as it needs to add more object files with the C
runtime under the hood. So in reality the compiler accepts some linker options
(and passes them through) to make it easier for the programmer.

For GCC you can use the `-###` option to see what commands would actually be
executed during compilation.  Use `-v` to get the same debugging information but
also execute the commands.

Usually it is desirable to avoid rebuilding objects unnecessarily, especially
when there is a large number of source files. This is usually done via set of
rules that establish dependencies. The most common tool for that is `make` and
`Makefile` is its configuration file that drives the compilation.


# Building with a concrete C specification version

If you want to make sure your code is built following a concrete C version, it
has two parts:

- you must request the C specification version in your C code
- you need an implementation (compiler, linker, ...) that supports the version
  you want

## Limiting your code to the specific C spec version

In [C89](http://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html), there was no
`__STDC_VERSION__` macro (note there are two underscores both leading and
terminating the macro).  In the [Normative Addendum
1](http://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c94_na1.html) for C89 from 1994, the macro was
defined with a value of `199409L`.  In the
[C99 specification](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/c99-standard.md)
the macro has a value of `199901L`.

So, if you want your compiler to use a minimal or a specific C version, work
with the macro and `#ifdef` and `#error` preprocessor directives.

```C
#ifndef __STDC_VERSION__
#error "__STDC_VERSION__ not defined.  C99 compiler or greater required."
#else
#if __STDC_VERSION__ < 199901L
#error "C99 compiler or greater required."
#endif
#endif
```

:eyes: [check-c-version.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/check-c-version.c)

:eyes: [request-c99.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/request-c99.c)

## Compiler version

In the [1997: Single UNIX Specification (SUS) version
2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_UNIX_Specification#1997:_Single_UNIX_Specification_version_2),
with systems supporting that version as UNIX98, the compiler binary supporting
C89 had to be named `c89`.  You can [search SUS ver 2
here](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7990989775/), and type `c89`.

In
[POSIX:2004](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_UNIX_Specification#2004:_POSIX:2004),
which corresponds to SUS ver 3 with updates, the C compiler binary supporting
C99 standard had to be named `c99`.  The [latest SUS
version](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/) (as of May, 2020)
still defines `c99`.  I expect the future SUS versions with require `c11` binary
to support the C11 standard.

Might be difficult to get the compiler work as the exact specification version.
For example, the following will compile while `//` are not part of C89, and
moreover, `_Bool` is not either and it does not issue even a warning.

```
janp:air:~$ cat main.c
int
main(void)
{
	// not in C89
	_Bool b;
}
$ c89 main.c
main.c:4:2: warning: // comments are not allowed in this language [-Wcomment]
        // not in C89
        ^
1 warning generated.
$ gcc -std=c89 -pedantic main.c
main.c:4:2: warning: // comments are not allowed in this language [-Wcomment]
        // not in C89
        ^
1 warning generated.
```

# Flexible array member

- since C99 (ยง6.7.2.1, item 16, page 103)
- it is an array without a dimension specified as the **last member** of the
  structure
  - handy for structures with a fixed header and some "padding" data of flexible
    length that is allocated dynamically
  - why not to use a pointer instead?  It is good when passing data over
    boundaries such as network, kernel/userland, etc. since deep structure
    copy is not necessary.
    - just copy the structure as a whole (however, it is necessary to know how
      large is the padding) because it is all contiguous memory
- `sizeof (the_structure)` gives you the size of the structure **as if
  the flexible array was empty**.

Example:

```C
struct item {
	int	itm_value;
	/* Other members follow*/
	/* ... */
	int	itm_plen;  // payload length in bytes
	char	itm_payload[];
	/* Nothing can follow! */
};
```

The memory layout looks like this:

```
+-------------+-----------------------+
| struct item |      payload ...      |
+-------------+-----------------------+
```

Previously, this was hacked around using array with 0 items and GCC accepted
this.  Since C99 this can be done properly using this technique.

The data for the structure is allocated as follows:

```C
struct item *p;

p = malloc(sizeof (struct item) + payload_len * sizeof (p->itm_payload[0]));
assert(p != NULL);
p->itm_plen = payload_len * sizeof (p->itm_payload[0]);
```

- with this approach the overall structure alignment might be lost
  - i.e. it is necessary to set the payload length according to the size
    of the structure if you want to maintain the alignment

:eyes: [flexible-array-member.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/flexible-array-member.c)

# Structure bit fields

- sometimes memory is scarce (imagine having to keep millions of big structures
  in memory) and there are members holding integer values that occupy just a
  couple of bytes
  - *bit fields* can be used to shrink the memory needed

```C
struct foo {
	unsigned int a : 3;
	unsigned int b : 1;
	unsigned int c : 4;
};
```

- the number after the colon specifies the number of bits for a given bit field
  - cannot exceed the size of the underlying data type (`unsigned int` in the
    above example)
- you cannot use `sizeof` on a bit field

- this is good for implementing network protocol headers or HW registers,
  however the layout of bit fields in a C structure is implementation dependant
  - if it needs to match a concrete layout, additional non-standard compiler
    features have to be used (`#pragma`'s etc.)
  - there is no `offsetof()` for bit fields

:eyes: [bitfield.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitfield.c)

- the integer values will behave as expected w.r.t. underflow/overflow and
integer conversions/manipulations, e.g.

```C
struct foo_s {
	unsigned int a : 3;
	unsigned int b : 1;
	unsigned int c : 4;
} foo;

foo.a = 7;
foo.a++; // will wrap around to 0 since this is unsigned
```

:eyes: [bitfield-wraparound.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitfield-wraparound.c)

:eyes: [bitfield-bitwise-ops.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitfield-bitwise-ops.c)

