# Warm-up
## :wrench: Convert units of measurement

Print conversion table for [Ell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ell) (rope length
used by Frodo and Sam in The Lord of the Rings had some 30 ells) to inches
and centimeters, i.e. table with 3 columns separated by tabs.

Print the centimeter value as float with 2 digit precision. The cm value
will be the last column.

Each 10 lines print a line (sequence of `-` characters, say 20 times).
The line will immediately follow the table header and then will appear
each 10 lines. Use `while` cycle to print the line.

Print 30 numeric rows.

Sample output:

```
Ell	Inches	Centimeters
--------------------
1	45	114.30
2	90	228.60
3	135	342.90
4	180	457.20
5	225	571.50
6	270	685.80
7	315	800.10
8	360	914.40
9	405	1028.70
10	450	1143.00
--------------------
11	495	1257.30
12	540	1371.60
13	585	1485.90
14	630	1600.20
15	675	1714.50
16	720	1828.80
17	765	1943.10
18	810	2057.40
19	855	2171.70
20	900	2286.00
--------------------
21	945	2400.30
22	990	2514.60
23	1035	2628.90
24	1080	2743.20
25	1125	2857.50
26	1170	2971.80
27	1215	3086.10
28	1260	3200.40
29	1305	3314.70
30	1350	3429.00
```

:key: [ell-in-cm.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ell-in-cm.c)


# Source code management

- keep all of your code somewhere.  Use a *distributed* source code management
  (SCM) system, ie. [Git](https://git-scm.com/) or [Mercurial](https://www.mercurial-scm.org/).
  - you could keep your repo in your home directory in the Linux lab as
    those machines are accessible via SSH from anywhere or use services
    like [Gitlab](https://about.gitlab.com/) or [Github](https://github.com) and such.
  - never use *centralized* SCMs like Subversion or CVS, unless you really
    have to, as those are things of the past century.

# Comments

- `/* one line comment */`

- multi line comment:
```
  /*
   * multi line comment.  Follow the C style.
   * multi line comment.  Follow the C style.
   */
```
- `// one line comment from C99+`

- use comments sparingly
  - not very useful:
  ```C
  /* increment i */
  ++i;
  ```
  - produce meaningful comments, not like this:
  ```C
  /* probably makes sense, but maybe not */
  if (...)
           do_something()
  ```

- Pick a reasonble style and stick to it.  Mising one line comments using both
  `//` and `/* */` is not the best style.

- In general, you can always figure out what the code does, it is just a matter
  of time to get there, but it may be impossible to figure out why the code
  works that way.  The reason might be historical, related to some other
  decisions or existing code, purely random, or something else.  If not clear,
  commenting code on the **why** is extremely important.

# Preprocessor

- defines:
  - basic defines: `#define FOO` or `#define FOO 1`
- includes:
  - `#include "foo.h"` (start in current directory and then continue the
    search in system paths) or `#include <foo/bar.h>` (just system paths)
    - some compilers display the include search paths (e.g. clang with `-v`)
    - use the `-I` compiler option to add search paths to the list
- conditional compilation:
  - `#if`, `#ifdef`, `#ifndef`, `#else`, `#endif`
    - `#if` can be used with expressions:
      ```C
      #if MY_VERS >= 42
      ...
      #endif
      ```
  - also useful for *header guards* (to avoid including same header file
    multiple times)
    ```C
    #ifndef FOO_H
    #define FOO_H
    ...
    #endif
    ```
  - can be used e.g. for debug code:
    ```C
    #ifdef DEBUG
    ... // here can be anything (where valid):
        // statements, variable declarations/definitions, function definitions, ...
    #endif
    ```
    - then the compiler can be run with `-DDEBUG` to enable the code
- macros: for more complicated code snippets, e.g. `#define IS_ZERO(a)  a == 0`
  - the argument will be replaced with whatever is given
  - use parens for `#define` to prevent problems with macro expansion
    - `#define	X	(1 + 1)`
    - same for more complicated macros:
      `#define MUL(a, b)  ((a) * (b))`

:eyes: [mul.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/mul.c)

To see the result of running preprocessor on your code, use `cpp` or
the `-E` option of the compiler.

### :wrench: Task: reimplement fahr-to-cent.c using defines instead of literal numbers

:key: [fahr-to-cent_defines.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fahr-to-cent_defines.c)

# Expressions

- every expression has a value

- logical expression has value 0 or 1, and its type is always `int`
```
1 > 10	... 0
10 > 1	... 1

printf("%d\n", 1 < 10);
--> 1
/* Yes, "equal to" in C is "==" as "=" is used for an assignment */
printf("%d\n", 100 == 101);
--> 0
```

- neverending `while` loop is for example as follows:

```
while (1) {
	...
}
```

# The `break` statement

- statement `break` will cause a jump out of a most inner while loop (well, any
  kind of loop but we only introduced the `while` loop so far).

```
	int finished = 0;
	while (1) {
		if (finished)
			break;
		/* not finished work done here */
		call_a_function();
		k = xxx;
		...
		if (yyy) {
			...
			finished = 1;
		}
		/* more work done here */
		...
	}
```

# Basic operators

- equality is `==` since a single `=` is an assignment operator

```C
int i = 13;
if (i == 13) {
	// will do something here
}
```

- logical AND and OR

```C
if (i == 13 && j < 10) {
	// ...

if (i == 1 || k > 100) {
	// ...
```

- you do not need extra ()'s as `||` and `&&` have lower priority than `==` and
  `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, and `!=`.  We will learn more about operator priority in
  later lectures.

- non-equality is `!=`

```C
if (i != 13) {
	// ...
}
```

# The comma operator

Useful to perform expression evaluations in one place. The first part is evaluated, then the second part.
The result of the expression is the result of the second part, e.g.:

```
while (a = 3, b < 10) {
...
}
```

The cycle will be controlled by the boolean result of the second expression.

This is not limited just to 2 expressions.

Note that the comma used in variable declaration (`int a, b = 3;`) or function
call is not comma operator.

:wrench: what will be returned ? :eyes: [comma.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/comma.c)

This is handy for cycle control expressions.

# The boolean type

There is a new `_Bool` type as of C99.  Put `0` as false, and a non-zero (stick
to `1` though) as a true value.

The keyword name starts with an underscore as such keywords were always reserved
in C while `bool`, `true`, nor `false` never were.  So, some older code might
actually use those names so if C99 just put those in the language, it would have
broken the code and that is generally not acceptable in C.

If you are certain that neither `bool`, `true`, nor `false` are used in the code
on its own, you can use those macros if you include `<stdbool.h>`.

In that case, the macro `bool` expands to `_Bool`.  `true` expands to `1` and
`false` to `0` and both may be also used in `#if` preprocessing directives.

See C99 section 7.16 for more information.

See :eyes: [bool.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bool.c)

# Numbers and types

- for example, the 1, 7, and 20000 integer literals are always integers of type
  `int` **if they fit** in (the range of an `int` is [-2^31, 2^31 - 1] on 32/64
  bit CPUs)
- Hexadecimal numbers start with `0x` or `0X`.  Eg. `0xFF`, `0Xaa`, `0x13f`,
  etc.
- Octal numbers start with `0`.  Eg. `010` is 8 in decimal.  Also remember the
  Unix file mask (umask), eg. `0644`.

- `'A'` is called *a character constant* and is always of type `int`.  See `man
  ascii` for their numeric values.  The ASCII standard defines characters with
  values 0-127.

- Note when we say a *character*, we mean a value that represents a character
  from the ASCII table.  A character is not the same thing as `char`.

- `float`, `double`
  - `man 3 printf`, see `%f` is of type `double`.  You can use:

```C
          float pi = 3.14
	  printf("%f\n", pi);
```

  - floats are automatically converted to doubles if used as arguments in
    functions with variable number of arguments (known as a "variadic
    function"), i.e. like printf()

- `char` (1 byte), `short` (usually 2 bytes), `long` (4 or 8 bytes), `long long`
  (usually 8 bytes, and can not be less).  It also depends on whether your
  binary is compiled in 32 or 64 bits.
  - :wrench: see what code emits your compiler by default (i.e. without using
    either `-m32` or `-m64` options)
    - use the `file` command to display the information about the binary

- see also *5.2.4.2 Numerical limits*
[in the C spec.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/c99-standard.md)
  For example, `int` must be at least 4 bytes but the C spec does not prevent it
  from being 8 bytes in the future.

- `char`s and `short`s are automatically converted to `int` if used as arguments
  in variadic functions.

- as `'X'` is `int` but within 0-127, it's OK to do the following as it will fit
  even if `char` is signed:
```C
	char c = 'A';
```

## Signedness

- each integer type has a `signed` and `unsigned` variant.  By default, the
  numeric types are signed aside from `char` which depends on the implementation
  (of the C compiler).  If you need an unsigned type, use `unsigned` reserved
  word.
```C
  signed int si;	// not used though, just use 'int si'
  unsigned int ui;
  unsigned long ul;
  unsigned long long ull;
  ...
```
- for `int`s, you do not even need to use the `int` keyword, ie. `signed i`,
  `unsigned u` are valid but it is recommended to use `int i` and `unsigned int
  u` anyway.

- You can use `long int` and `long long int` or just `long` and `long long`,
  respectively.  The latter is mostly used in C.

- `char` and `short int` is converted to `int` in variadic functions (we will
  talk more about integer conversions later in semester).  That is why the
  following is correct as the compiler will first convert variable `c` to `int`
  type, then put it on the stack (Intel x32 passing argument convention) or in a
  register (Intel x64 convention).

```C
	/* OK */
	char c = 127;
	printf("%d\n", c);

	/* OK */
	short sh = 32768;
	printf("%d\n", sh);
```

## Modifiers for printf()

- `l` for `long`, eg. `long l; printf("%ld\n", l);`
- `ll` for `long long`, eg. `long long ll; printf("%lld\n", ll);`

- `u` is unsigned, `x` is unsigned hexa, `X` is unsigned HEXA

```C
	unsigned int u = 13;
	printf("%u\n", u);

	unsigned long long llu = 13;
	printf("%llu\n", llu);

	unsigned int u = 13;
	printf("%x\n", u);
	// --> d
	printf("%X\n", u);
	// --> D
```

- the following is a problem though if compiled in 32 bits as you put 4 bytes on
  the stack but `printf` will take 8 bytes.  Older compilers may not warn you at
  all!

```
	/* DEFINITELY NOT OK.  Remember, 13 is of the "int" type. */
	printf("%lld\n", 13);

	$ cc -m32 wrong-modifier.c
	wrong-modifier.c:6:19: warning: format specifies type 'long
	long' but the argument has type 'int' [-Wformat]
		printf("%lld\n", 13);
			~~~~     ^~
			%d
	1 warning generated.
	$ ./a.out
	2026120757116941
```

 - when compiled in 64 bits, it is still as incorrect as before but it will
   print 13 anyway as 13 is assigned to a 64 bit register (because of x64 ABI).
   So, if you use that code successfully in 64 bits you might be surprised if
   the code is then compiled in 32 bits and "suddenly" gets broken.

```
	$ cc -m64 wrong-modifier.c
	wrong-modifier.c:6:19: warning: format specifies type 'long
	long' but the argument has type 'int' [-Wformat]
		printf("%lld\n", 13);
			~~~~     ^~
			%d
	1 warning generated.
	$ ./a.out
	13
```

:eyes: [wrong-modifier.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/wrong-modifier.c)

## Suffixes

- you can explicitly specify integer constants with different integer types
  using suffices

	- `13L` and `13l` is a `long`
	- `13LL` and `13ll` is a `long long` (`Ll` and `lL` is illegal)
	- `13u` and `13U` is an `unsigned int`
	- `13lu` and `13LU` is an `unsigned long`
	- `13llu` and `13LLU` is an `unsigned long long`

- so, `0xFULL` and `0XFULL` is an `unsigned long long` 15 :-)

```C
	printf("%llu\n", 0xFULL);
	// --> 15
	printf("%lld", 13LL);	/* OK */
	// --> 13
	/* NOT OK as long may be 4 bytes while long long is 8+ bytes */
	printf("%ld", 13LL);
	// --> ??
```

- Escape sequences `\ooo` and `\xhh` (not `\Xhh`) are character sized bit
  patterns, either specified as octal or hexadecimal numbers.  They can be used
  in string constants and in character constants.  They are still of type `int`
  as they are character constants, see above.

```C
	printf("\110\x6F\154\x61");
	printf("%c\n", '\x21');
	// -> Hola!
```

# The `sizeof` operator

- the `sizeof` operator computes the byte size of its argument which is an
  expression or a type
  - this is not a function so you can use it without parens: `sizeof foo`
  - its type is `size_t` which is an unsigned integer according to the
    standard.  However, the implementation (= compiler) can choose whether
    it's an `unsigned int`, an `unsigned long int`, or an `unsigned long long
    int`.
  - in printf(), the `z` modifier modifies `u` to `size_t`, so this is the
    right way to do it:

```C
printf("%zu\n", sizeof (13));
// --> 4
```

  - you may see code using `%u`, `%lu`, `%llu` for `sizeof` values.  However,
    that will only work based on a specific compiler and the architecture and
    may not work using a different combination.  Always use `%zu` for arguments
    of type `size_t`.

- the expression within the `sizeof` operator is **never** executed (the
  compiler should warn you about such code).  **Only the size in bytes needed to
  store the value if evaluated is returned.**

```C
int i = 1;
printf("%zu\n", sizeof (i = i + 1));
// --> 4
printf("%d\n", i);
// --> 1
```

- :wrench: try `sizeof` on various values and types in printf(), compile with
  `-m 32` and `-m 64` and see the difference

```C
sizeof (1);
sizeof (char);
sizeof (long);
sizeof (long long);
sizeof ('A');
sizeof (1LL);
// ...
```

- we will get there later in semester but if you are bored, try to figure out
  why the following is going to print `1 4 4`:

```C
char c;
printf("%zu\n", sizeof (c));
// --> 1
printf("%zu\n", sizeof (c + 1));
// --> 4
printf("%zu\n", sizeof (+c));
// --> 4
```

The `sizeof` operator is usually evaluated during compilation time however
this is not universally true (for Variable Length Arrays (VLAs) it has to
happen during runtime. The VLAs will be explained later).

# Integer literals

- An *integer literal* can be a decimal, octal, or hexadecimal constant. 

- so, all of these are equal:
```C
	printf("%c\n", 0101);
	// --> A
	printf("%c\n", 0x41);
	// --> A
	printf("%c\n", 65);
	// --> A
```

- `0` is octal constant, not a decimal constant, since an octal constant always
  begins with `0`.  The following will generate an error:

```C
printf("%d\n", 099);
```

```
main.c: In function ‘main’:
main.c:6:17: error: invalid digit "9" in octal constant
    6 |  printf("%d\n", 099);
      |                 ^~~
```

- if you use a larger number than fits within a byte as an argument for the `%c`
  conversion, the higher bits are trimmed.  The rule here is that the `int`
  argument is converted within `printf` to `unsigned char` (not just `char`!),
  then printed as a character (= letter).  More on integer conversion in
  upcoming lectures.  See also
[Numbers](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/numbers.md)
  on why you never pass a `char` nor `short` to a variadic function.
	- also note the existence of `h` and `hh` modifiers.  See the printf()
	  man page for more information.

```C
	printf("%c\n", 65 + 256 + 256 + 256 * 100);
	// --> still prints A
```

- assignment is also an expression, meaning it has a value of the result, so the
  following is legal and all variables `a`, `b`, and `c` will be initialized
  with 13
```C
	int a, b, c;
	a = b = c = 13;
```

### :wrench: Task: print ASCII table

Print ASCII table with hexadecimal values like on in the ascii(7) man page
https://man.openbsd.org/ascii except for non-printable characters print `NP`
(non-printable).

To determine whether a character is printable you can use the `isprint()`
function.

Use just `while` and `if` (without `else`).

Sample output:
```
00 NP	01 NP	02 NP	03 NP	04 NP	05 NP	06 NP	07 NP	
08 NP	09 NP	0a NP	0b NP	0c NP	0d NP	0e NP	0f NP	
10 NP	11 NP	12 NP	13 NP	14 NP	15 NP	16 NP	17 NP	
18 NP	19 NP	1a NP	1b NP	1c NP	1d NP	1e NP	1f NP	
20  	21 !	22 "	23 #	24 $	25 %	26 &	27 '	
28 (	29 )	2a *	2b +	2c ,	2d -	2e .	2f /	
30 0	31 1	32 2	33 3	34 4	35 5	36 6	37 7	
38 8	39 9	3a :	3b ;	3c <	3d =	3e >	3f ?	
40 @	41 A	42 B	43 C	44 D	45 E	46 F	47 G	
48 H	49 I	4a J	4b K	4c L	4d M	4e N	4f O	
50 P	51 Q	52 R	53 S	54 T	55 U	56 V	57 W	
58 X	59 Y	5a Z	5b [	5c \	5d ]	5e ^	5f _	
60 `	61 a	62 b	63 c	64 d	65 e	66 f	67 g	
68 h	69 i	6a j	6b k	6c l	6d m	6e n	6f o	
70 p	71 q	72 r	73 s	74 t	75 u	76 v	77 w	
78 x	79 y	7a z	7b {	7c |	7d }	7e ~	7f NP	

```

:key: [ascii-hex.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ascii-hex.c)

# getchar()

- `getchar` function reads one character from the process standard input and
  returns its value as an `int`.
	- when it reaches end of input (for example, by pressing `Ctrl-D` in the
	  terminal), it returns `EOF`
	- `EOF` is a define, usually set as `-1`.  That is why `getchar` returns
	  an `int` instead of a `char` as it needs an extra value for `EOF`.
	- `getchar` needs `#include <stdio.h>`
	- you can verify that `EOF` is part of `<stdio>`, search for "getchar"
	  here: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799

### :wrench: Task: write code that will read characters from a terminal and prints them out.

It should work like this:
```
	$ cat /etc/passwd | ./a.out > passwd
	$ diff passwd /etc/passwd
	$ echo $?
	0
```
- remember, we said above that an assignment is just an expression, so it has a
  value.  So, you can do this:
```C
	if ((c = getchar()) == EOF)
		return (0);
```
  instead of:
```C
	c = getchar();
	if (c == EOF)
		return (0);
```

However, do **not** abuse it as you may create a hard to read code.  Note the
parentheses around the assignment.  The `=` operator has lower priority than the
`==` operator.  If the parens are not used, the following would happen:

`if (c = getchar() == EOF)` would be evaluated as:

`if (c = (getchar() == EOF))`, meaning that "c" would be either 0 or 1
		based on whether we read a character or the terminal input is
		closed.

We will learn more about operator priority later in the semester.

:key: [getchar.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/getchar.c)


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## :wrench: Count digit occurrence

If unsure about the behavior, compile our solution and run it.

- read characters until `EOF` and count occurence of each 0-9 digit.
  Only use what we have learned so far.  You may end up with longer code than
  otherwise necessary but that is OK.

```
$ cat /etc/passwd | ./a.out
0: 27
1: 37
2: 152
3: 38
4: 39
5: 43
6: 34
7: 35
8: 29
9: 31
```

:key: [count-numbers.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/count-numbers.c)

- variant: instead of printing occurrences, print `*` characters to get a
  histogram.  Use `log()` (see `math(3)`) to trim the values down.

## :wrench: To upper

Convert small characters to upper chars in input.  Use the fact that a-z and
A-Z are in two consequtive sections of the ASCII table.

Use the else branch:

```
	if (a) {
		...
	} else {
		...
	{
```

Expected output:

```
	$ cat /etc/passwd  | ./a.out
	##
	# USER DATABASE
	#
	# NOTE THAT THIS FILE IS CONSULTED DIRECTLY ONLY WHEN THE SYSTEM IS RUNNING
	# IN SINGLE-USER MODE.  AT OTHER TIMES THIS INFORMATION IS PROVIDED BY
	# OPEN DIRECTORY.
	#
	# SEE THE OPENDIRECTORYD(8) MAN PAGE FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ABOUT
	# OPEN DIRECTORY.
	##
	NOBODY:*:-2:-2:UNPRIVILEGED USER:/VAR/EMPTY:/USR/BIN/FALSE
	...
	...
```

:key: [to-upper.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/to-upper.c)

