Topics: strlen, ternary operator, arithmetic type conversions, negative numbers,
integer overflows, compiler warning options

# Warm-up
## `toupper`

Rewrite the
[convert small characters to upper case](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/home-assignments/toupper.md)
program using a function.

:key: [toupper.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/toupper.c)

### Implementation notes

- There is a `toupper()` library function from C99 so use a different name, say
  `mytoupper()`
	- What happens if the program defines `int toupper(int)` ?
		- The symbol in `libc` is
		  [*weak*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_symbol) so it
		  works

### Variant: do this via lookup table - array

- Generate array indexed by `a`..`z` (with corresponding values `A`..`Z`) in
  `main()` and use the array in the `mytoupper()` function
- Arrays passed as function argument are in reality converted to pointers (to be
  introduced later)
	- so it is useless to write their size like this:

```C
/* see what is the value of sizeof(array) inside the func() */
 void func(int array[3]);
```

- this is better:

```C
 void func(int array[], size_t size);
```

- Also, if the items in the array are changed in the function, they will be
  changed in the array itself (consequence of pointer conversion)

- What happens if `mytoupper(-1)` ?
- `short` is sufficient to store the value:

```C
short uppper[] = { 'A', 'B', ... };
```

:key: [toupper-table.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/toupper-table.c)

## A trivial grep

:wrench: Write code to implement `grep *word*`

```
$ cat /etc/passwd | ./a.out root
root:x:0:0::/root:/bin/bash

```

Assume a reasonable maximum line width, e.g. 1024 bytes including the newline.
Print an error and exit with 1 (i.e. `return (1)` from `main`) when hitting a
line that crosses that limit.  Test that it works as expected!

Note that it is generally better to fail rather then silently choose what to do
on situations like that.  For example, just ignoring the rest of the line after
the 1024 byte limit which might be very confusing for users.

Solution: TBD.  You can send us your solution so that we use it here.  Do it as
simple as possible.


# String length

We know that we can use `sizeof` to get a length of a character array including
the terminating `'\0'` character.  There is a more generic way to get a string
length, function `strlen()` that returns the number of characters without
the terminating zero.  Note that when we know what pointers are, the
existence of the function will make more sense.

The function is declared in `<string.h>` and returns a value of type `size_t`,
that is the same type as the operator `sizeof` uses.  So, remember to use the
`z` modifier to the `%u` conversion specifier:

```C
#include <string.h>

char s[] = "hello, world";

printf("Length of \"%s\": %zu\n", s, strlen(s));
```

Note that to include a literal `"` in a string, you just escape it.

## Checking empty string

`strlen()` can be used to check if string is empty, however if not, it will
incur performance penalty as it has to go through all the characters.

Thus, it is better to check just the first character - if it is `\0` then
the string is empty.

:eyes: [string-isempty.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/string-isempty.c)

# More on functions/arrays

## Variable length array (VLA)

- Automatically allocated based on a variable value.  Only for local variables,
  not globals.  Same warning applies w.r.t. array size and stack growth as with
  fixed width arrays.

```C
void fn(int n, int m)
{
    int a[n + m];
    ...
}
```
- :eyes: [array-variable-length.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-variable-length.c)

- :heavy\_exclamation\_mark: Note that it generates more code which might be
  avoided with a choosing a reasonable constant, if possible.  Also see [a rant
  from Linus](https://lkml.org/lkml/2018/3/7/621).

## K&R

History: you may still see in very old code: K&R
([Kernighan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian_Kernighan) and
[Ritchie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennis_Ritchie))
definition with types of arguments on separate line(s):

```C
int
foo(a, b)
int a; int b;
{
	/* body */
}
```

Some compilers have dropped the support for K&R definitions or will drop it
soon.

## Function is not object

Like an array, function is not a first class object (i.e. no "functor" like in
functional languages).

- That said, there are pointers to functions (more on these later).

# Scope

- Every identifier has its *scope*.

- The scope of an identifier is the part of the program within which the
  identifier name can be used.

- For example, we can declare a variable `int i` in the `main` function, and as
  well as in another function.  Those two variables reference different
  [objects](/modules/object.md).

- For now, we only care about two types of scope - a file, and a block.

- When declaring an identifier inside a block or within the list of parameter
  declarations in a function definition, the identifier has *block scope*.
  Its scope is from the variable declaration to the end of the block.

- When declaring a variable outside of any block or list of parameters, the
  identifier has *file scope*.

- Note that a block is used in multiple constructs in C, e.g. `while`, `for`,
  etc.

- Within the inner block, an identifier of the same name declared in the
  outer block is hidden (and not visible).  See:

	- :eyes: [shadow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow.c)
	- :eyes: [shadow-block.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow-block.c)

# Functions with variable number of arguments

- Functions can have variable number of arguments of different types (more on
  that later).
	- It must have at least one fixed argument (or more), and the rest is
	  denoted with three dots `...`
	- The dots are called *ellipsis*
```C
int printf(fmt, ...);
```

- The first argument typically describes the rest of arguments in some way
	- Usually it is a format string as in `printf`.  It could possibly be an
	  argument count if those were of the same type however in that case
	  they would probably be passed as an pointer (we will get to pointers
	  in a later class).

:wrench: write a function that takes variable number of `ULL` arguments and
returns their sum

- Use the stdarg(3) man page.
- What happens if there is one `int` value passed in between the `ULL`
  arguments?

:key: [stdarg.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/stdarg.c)

We already saw in [the numbers module](/modules/numbers.md) that you need to
match the type of arguments with the type of conversion specifiers.  Why does
the following work even when built in 32 bits?  We are using an argument of type
`char`, which is 1 byte, but the `printf` functions assumes through the `%d`
specifier there are 4 bytes on stack (x32) or in the register (x64).  Yes it
works.  Why?

```C
char c = 13;

printf("%d", c);
```

:eyes: [wrong-modifier.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/wrong-modifier.c)

# Ternary operator

```
    cond ? expr1 : expr 2
```
same as
```
    if (cond) expr else expr2
```
e.g.
```
    max = (i > j) ? i : j;
```
note that if we add a semicolon, an expression becomes a statement, e.g.:
```
      (i == j) ? i++ : j++;
```
will increment `i` or `j`.  The parens are not needed but generally used for
better readability.

code: :eyes: [ternary-assign.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ternary-assign.c)

## :wrench: toupper using ternary operator

Rewrite the
[convert small characters to upper case](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/toupper.md)
program from last time using a function that utilizes the ternary operator
(single line of code)

:key: [toupper-ternary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/toupper-ternary.c)

## :wrench: Min/max of 3 integer values

write an expression that returns maximum of 3 integers `i`, `j`, `k` using
ternary operator

  - do not use any macros

:key: [3max.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/3max.c)

# Negative numbers

Negative numbers are usually stored in [two's complement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two's_complement)
(however, that is implementation defined by C99).

In short, you take an absolute value, create one's complement (inverting the
digits in binary representation) and add 1.  There are several advantages of
this representation, one is that there is only 1 zero (not negative and positive
zero if we used the highest bit to track the sign).  That is why a `signed
char`, for example, can hold -128 to 127, and not just -127 to 127.

For a `char`:
```
 10000000	-128
 ........
 11111101	  -3
 11111110	  -2      ^
 11111111	  -1      |
 --------------------------
 00000000	   0      |
 00000001	   1      v
 00000010	   2
 ........
 01111111	 127
```

On Unix systems the shell reports the -1 return value as 255 in `echo $?`.  Even
though the `main()` returns integer (4 bytes), the calling program (shell) gets
just the low 8 bits and interprets them as unsigned quantity.

:eyes: [return-1.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/return-1.c)

# Arithmetic type conversions

In (very) general, if *binary* operators have operands of different types, the
"lower" is promoted to "upper".  E.g. if one operand is a `long` and the other
is an `int`, the other operand is promoted to a `long`.  An unsigned type is
always higher to its corresponding signed type.  That is, if summing up a
`signed int` with an `unsigned int`, the signed one will be converted to an
unsigned first.

To give you a glimpse into what this means:

```C
int
main(void)
{
	/* Also try with '-10 + 1U + 10U' */
	printf("%ld\n", -10 + 1U + 10L);
}
```

You would expect the result to be `1`, right?

```
$ cc main.c
$ ./a.out
4294967297
```

However, `-10 + 11U + 10L` would result in `11`, and `-1 + 2U` would result in
`1`.

:eyes: [not-one.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/not-one.c)

What is more, in most operations (for every operator, the spec says what is
done in this respect), `char` and `short` integer operands are *promoted* to
an `int`, or to an `unsigned int` if they do not fit in an `int`.  That
conversion is called *integer promotion*.  This is done to make the language
runtime fast (on x86 32-bit arithmetics can be much faster than when using
16-bit operands).

  - Note that the only way an `unsigned short` would not fit a (signed) `int`
    but fit an `unsigned int` is if both types had the same size (e.g. 4 bytes).
    You will probably not use such a compiler/platform combination, ever.

The **most operations** from the above sentence means all binary operators.  A
ternary operator as well.  And even some unary operators.

`sizeof (1)` is 4 because 1 is an `int`.  However, if a number does not fit to
an `int`, a higher type will be used.  For example, `4294967296` (2^32 =
`UINT_MAX + 1`) will be stored in 8 bytes, so `sizeof (4294967296)` is 8.

Does it sound confusing?  Do not worry, we will give you specific rules later in
the [*Arithmetic/integer promotion and
conversion*](/modules/arithmetic-promotion-and-conversions.md) section.

:wrench: Verify that numbers that do not fit in an `int` will have a size of 8
bytes.

## Examples

Assuming `char c;` declaration, then:

- `sizeof (999)` is 4 as `999` is an `int` by definition.
- `sizeof (c)` is 1, always
- `sizeof (c + c)` is 4 as `+` is a binary operator and the integer promotion
  kicks in, as mentioned above
- `sizeof (++c)` is still 1 as `++` is an unary operator for which the integer
  promotion rules do not apply.
- `sizeof (+c)` is 4 as for unary `+` and `-`, the integer promotion is applied.
  - You just need to know or check the spec if you do not remember.  Most
    of the time it does not matter but do not fool yourself, if you do not
    know details like that in C, it will bite you sooner or later.
  - remember [A Case Study of Toyota Unintended Acceleration and Software Safety](https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/pubs/koopman14_toyota_ua_slides.pdf)
    from the [first class](/modules/intro.md)
- `sizeof (1LL)` will usually be 8 as `long long` is usually 8 bytes.

It gets more interesting if unsigned and signed numbers are involved.  E.g. a
`signed int` is promoted to an `unsigned int` if one of the `int` operand is
unsigned.

The above is called *implicit type conversion*.  There is also *explicit type
conversion* (called *casting*) which we will deal with later.

I suggest you try these out with `printf("%zu", ...)`. The `%zu` format string
(see the `printf` manual page in section 3 on Unix systems) matches the return
type of the `sizeof` operand.  The exact unsigned numeric type of what `sizeof`
returns may differ in different implementations so `%zu` will work anywhere.

## Example 2

If `long` is 8 bytes, and `int` 4 bytes, then `-1L < 1U` is true as you might
expect.  If both types are 4 bytes though, the relational expression is false!
See *6.3.1.8 Usual arithmetic conversions*, paragraph *1*, for the details.

However, `-1 > 1U` is true because `-1` is promoted to `unsigned int`.  Two's
complement representation of -1 is:

```
(1) take absolute value of 1	00000000.00000000.00000000.00000001
(2) one's complement		11111111.11111111.11111111.11111110
(3) add 1 to get 2's complement	11111111.11111111.11111111.11111111
```

which is `2^32 - 1` when interpreted as unsigned quantity.

Just `printf("%u\n", -1)` to see it will print `4294967295` (use the Unix/Linux
`bc` command and type `2^32-1` to verify).

:eyes: [signed-plus-unsigned.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/signed-plus-unsigned.c)
:eyes: [signed-to-unsigned.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/signed-to-unsigned.c)

## Example 3

The assymetry of the negative/positive interval can lead to the program crashing
on architectures that detect it. This is consequence of hardware handling rather
than the language.

:eyes: [crashme.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/crashme.c)

- run with `-INT_MIN` (see `limits.h`) and `-1`.  `INT_MIN` is usually
  `-2147483648`. The program would normally yield `2147483648` (positive number)
  however that would be `INT_MAX + 1`.
- works in 64-bit mode as well due to int being passed in 32-bit registers

```
$ cc -m64 crashme.c
$ ./a.out 2147483648 -1
-2147483648 -1
Floating point exception: 8
$ echo $?
136
$ kill -l 136
FPE

$ cc -m32 crashme.c
$ ./a.out 2147483648 -1
2147483647 -1
$
```

## :wrench: Quiz 1

- what is the result if `0xff` `signed char` and `0xff` `unsigned char` are
  compared using the `==` operator ?
  - write down the hexadecimal representation of the integers corresponding to
    the 2 chars with `printf()`

:key: [int-promotion.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/int-promotion.c)

- note that if the `b` character was defined as `char b` the result might be 1
  because it is up to the compiler to choose whether `char` is signed or
  unsigned.  Usually it is signed though. There are compiler options to specify
  this, e.g. GCC has `-funsigned-char` and `-fsigned-char`

## :wrench: Quiz 2

Will the program print the whole array ?
  - try to come up with reason of the expected behavior before running the
    program.

:eyes: [whole-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/whole-array.c)

# Function arguments

Say, what happens if you put a `char` as an argument of a function that accepts
an `int`?  As you might expect, the byte is just assigned to an `int`.

In general, the expressions passed as arguments are evaluated first, then the
value of the resulted type is converted to the parameter type as in assignment.

More on that later.  For more information, see 6.9.1 in
[C99](/modules/c99-standard.md)

The order of evaluation of function arguments is unspecified, see 6.5.2.2p10
in [C99](/modules/c99-standard.md):

> The order of evaluation of the function designator, the actual arguments, and
> subexpressions within the actual arguments is unspecified, but there is a
> sequence point before the actual call.

That means, do not do things like these as it is not specified whether the 2nd
argument expression is evaluated after the first agument is processed, or
before.  So, based on the compiler you use, you may either call the function
with `(1, 2)` or `(2, 2)`.

```
int i = 1;

myfn(i, ++i);
```

# Compiler warnings

- each compiler has its own set of warnings that usually give a clue that
  something strange and potentially harmful can happen.
  - there are differences between various compilers
  - will focus on GCC here
  - during the old days the tool producing these warnings was called `lint`
    that had to be run separately (there was not enough memory to do both at
    once).  Now those extra checkes are usually part of the compiler itself.

  - the basic: `-Wall -Wextra`
    - `-Wall` catches things like missing return value from a function that
      should return one

      :eyes: [no-return.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/no-return.c)

    - there are many places where a beginner can shoot himself into a foot
      by not knowing the language intricacies.
      - e.g. variable cannot be modified more than once between sequencing
	points. The `-Wsequence-point` that is included in `-Wall` warns about
	that

      :eyes: [sequence-point-violation.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/sequence-point-violation.c)

  - the `-Wshadow` can catch shadow variables overriding:

    :eyes: [shadow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow.c)
    :eyes: [shadow-block.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow-block.c)

  - all or specific warnings can be turned into errors: `-Werrror` or
    `-Werror=<insert_specific_error>` , respectively
    - unless the warnings contain false positives (and those can usually be
      suppressed) this will help to avoid troubles later

  - there are other means to check for correctness (static/dynamic analysis),
    more on those later

## :wrench: Use the options

Go through the programs written so far and run the compiler using the
  `-Wall -Wextra` options.
  - what kind of problems did you discover ? how to fix them ?
    - see e.g. :eyes: [whole-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/whole-array.c)
      example above (where only `-Wextra` gives some clue)

Explore the compiler documentation for more helpful options.
Over the time you will find a set of warning options that will serve you well.

# Types of behavior in C

From C99, Annex J.

## 3. Terms, definitions, and symbols

...

### 3.4.1

*implementation-defined behavior* is unspecified behavior where each
implementation documents how the choice is made.

An example of implementation-defined behavior is the propagation of
the high-order bit when a signed integer is shifted right.

...

### 3.4.3

*undefined behavior* is behavior, upon use of a nonportable or erroneous program
construct or of erroneous data, for which this International Standard imposes no
requirements.

Possible undefined behavior ranges from ignoring the situation completely with
unpredictable results, to behaving during translation or program execution in a
documented manner characteristic of the environment (with or without the
issuance of a diagnostic message), to terminating a translation or execution
(with the issuance of a diagnostic message).

An example of undefined behavior is the behavior on integer overflow.

...

### 3.4.4

*unspecified behavior* is use of an unspecified value, or other behavior where
this International Standard provides two or more possibilities and imposes no
further requirements on which is chosen in any instance.

An example of unspecified behavior is the order in which the arguments to a
function are evaluated.

## Notes

See also
[More Information on Undefined Behavior.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/undefined-behavior.md)

# Integer overflow

- what happens if `int` overflows ?
  - the behavior of overflow depends on whether the type is signed or unsigned
    - :heavy\_exclamation\_mark: for signed types the behavior is
[undefined](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/undefined-behavior.md)
      I.e. you cannot rely that an overflow of a positive quantity in any signed
      integer will be turned into a negative number.
      - Some compilers will allow to choose the behavior of signed overflows
	using special options (`-fwrapv` for GCC), though.
    - for unsigned integers, an overflow always wraps around (modulo power of 2)
      as it is defined behavior.

  :eyes: [int-overflow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/int-overflow.c)
  :eyes: [unsigned-overflow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/unsigned-overflow.c)

    - use `-fstrict-overflow -Wstrict-overflow` (will become active only for
      higher optimization levels, i.e. `-O<X>` where `X > 1`) to stay on the
      safe side

See the difference in using `-ftrapv` and not:

```C
janp:t490:~$ cat main.c
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
	int i = 2147483647;
	printf("%d\n", ++i);
}
```

```
$ gcc main.c
$ ./a.out
-2147483648
$ gcc -ftrapv main.c
$ ./a.out
Aborted (core dumped)
```


# :wrench: Home assignments

## Conway 1D

write a 1-D implementation of [Conway's game of life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life)
  - use [rule 30](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Rule30.html) to determine the
    state
  - use two arrays (one 2-D and one 1-D) to represent the rules and its
    resulting values
    - there are 8 rules, each has 3 values to compare against and one result
  - we now have the arsenal to write 2-D variant however to display 2-D
    world some way to refresh the terminal would be needed so we will stick
    with 1-D.
    - use `\r` to reset the line between iterations
    - sleep for 1 second between iterations (`unistd.h` is needed for that)
  - each life "tick" will print the line representing the world
  - use functions to refactor the code
  - once you have a working solution, try to rewrite it to be more efficient
    or elegant (or both)

## Byte count to human readable string

Write function to convert `uint64_t` to human readable count (binary - see
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orders\_of\_magnitude_(data) or
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mebibyte, e.g. MiB as mebibyte, etc.) and print it
to standard output.

```C
void bytecnt2str(uint64_t num);
```

  - use character array to represent the magnitude letters and perform
    the lookup based on the actual magnitude
  - if there is a remainder, write a '+' following the number
  - write the output in single `printf()` (use [ternary operator](/modules/ternary-operator.md) for the remainder)

  - example inputs/outputs:
```
1024		1 KiB
1025		1+ KiB
2047		1+ KiB
2048		2 KiB
2049		2+ KiB
5242880		5 MiB
```
  solution: [bytecnt2str.c](src/bytecnt2str.c)

## Offset checker

write a function that has the following prototype:

```C
  bool check(long off, size_t size, size_t limit);
```
  - checks if the arguments are valid for accessing part of a file (no
    operations will be done, just the check) of size 'size' starting from an
    offset 'off'. The length of the file is given by the 'limit' argument.
  - offset may be negative

```
    |           |         |              |
    0          off     off+size        limit
```

  - try to capture all corner cases of what could go wrong with the values
    and return `false` on failure, `true` on success.

:key: [range-check.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/range-check.c)

  - on Unix systems one would use `ssize_t` for the offset which is a signed
    integer type of the same size as `size_t` (`ssize_t` is not part of C99 but
    POSIX)

  - also, implement a set of test values in `main()` using an array

