# Warm-up
## Print a circle

Print a circle of a chosen radius.  Use a define for the radius so that you can
test other sizes.  This is for 12, for example:

```
$ ./a.out
            *
        **** ****
      **         **
     *             *
    *               *
   *                 *
  *                   *

 *                     *



*                       *



 *                     *

  *                   *
   *                 *
    *               *
     *             *
      **         **
        **** ****
            *
```

Hint: an equation for a circle is `x^2 + y^2 = MYRAD^2`, ie.

```
y = sqrt(MYRAD * MYRAD - x * x);
```

Obviously, there are more ways how to do it.

- the easiest way is to use a two-dimensional array and go through the `x` axis
  and fill the corresponding `y` value before printing out the array line by
  line.
  - to print the array, instead of printing it a character by character, we can
    also use array lines as strings if we terminate each line first with a `\0`.
- you could print the output line by line, that is, figure out what to print on
  each line.  You do not need a two-dimensional array then, and speaking of
  which, not even an array at all.

You can find the `sqrt()` function declaration in `<math.h>`.  You can also use
`memset()` from `string.h` to set a piece of memory to a specific byte (=
character).

On Linux and possibly other systems, you will need to link with the math library
to get the `sqrt()` function code, ie:

```
$ gcc -lm warm-up.c
```

An extension: fill the circle up.

```
$ ./a.out
            *
        *********
      *************
     ***************
    *****************
   *******************
  *********************
  *********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
*************************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
  *********************
  *********************
   *******************
    *****************
     ***************
      *************
        *********
            *
```

Solution:
:eyes: [circle.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/circle.c)

A simplified solution:
:eyes: [circle-simplified.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/circle-simplified.c)


# File API

Part of the standard since C90.

## Opening/closing

- `fopen("path", "mode")` opens a file and returns a pointer to an opaque `FILE`
  type.  That pointer serves as a handle.
	- getting `NULL` means an error
	- the `mode` argument controls the behavior: read (`r`), write (`w`),
	  append (`a`)
		- the `+` adds the other mode (write for read and vice versa,
		  read for append).
	  - write mode `w` creates the file if it does not exist, and truncates
	    it if it does exist
[the standard)](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/c99-standard.md)
	- `fclose` closes the handle
		  - important to avoid resource leak (`fopen` can allocate both
		    memory and file descriptor)
```C
FILE *fp;

/* Choose any other file you have on your system. */
if ((fp = fopen("/etc/passwd", "r")) == NULL)
	err(1, "fopen");

/* process the file... */

if (fclose(fp) != 0)
	err(1, "fclose failed");
```

- the `b` binary mode usually does not have any effect
- `freopen` can be used to associate the standard streams (`stderr`, `stdin`, or
  `stdout`) with a file
	- that means e.g. reading the standard input would automatically read
	  from a specific file, if you wanted that
	- `printf(...)` is equivalent to `fprintf(stdout, ...)`.  However, you
	  can print directly to `stderr` with `fprintf`

```C
fprintf(stderr, "Error happened: %s\n", "some error");
```

:wrench: write a code that opens the same file in an cycle (until `fopen()`
fails) without calling `fclose()` on the handle. After how many iterations does
it fail on your system?

:eyes: [fopen-leak.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fopen-leak.c)

## I/O

- `fprintf` - `printf` to a stream
- `fscanf`
	  - basically parses text input from a stream according to format string
	  - except the format string all the parameters must be pointers
- `fputs`/`fgets` - send/read string to/from a stream

```C
fputs("hello, world\n", stdout);
```

- `fputc`/`fgetc` - send/read `char` to/from a stream

```C
fputc('x', stderr);
```

- `fwrite`/`fread` - for writing/reading binary data (such as structures or raw
  numeric types)

- `feof`/`ferror` - determine if the last I/O operation hit end of file or
  error.

## Read a file

`fread`() reads a selected number of items of a given size to memory.  We can
use either an array or we can directly read to a variable through an operator
address-of.  In our case, we will be reading a file byte by byte, so we can give
`fread`() just an address of a character variable.

You can ignore the `restrict` keyword, it is intended as a hit for a compiler
optimization, and also just accept now that we can assign any pointer to a `void
*` pointer.

```C
size_t fread(void *restrict ptr, size_t size, size_t nmemb,
	    FILE *restrict stream);
```

Now we will read the file in chunks of one byte only.  Therefore we can use an
`address-of` operator on a `char` object.

```C
char c;
FILE *fp;

/* Choose any other file you have on your system. */
if ((fp = fopen("/etc/passwd", "r")) == NULL)
	err(1, "fopen");

/*
 * fread() returns a number of *items* read.  In our case, it's the same as
 * number of bytes as we read it one byte at a time.
 */
while (fread(&c, sizeof (c), 1, fp) == 1) {
	putchar(c);
}

fclose(fp);
```

:eyes: [read-file.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/read-file.c)

:wrench: Note that you could read more characters at a time.  However, keep in
mind the 2nd argument is size of the element read, and the 3rd argument is how
many elements we read in one call.  Remember that using an array name `a` is the
same as `&a[0]`.  For example:

```C
char a[16];
...
while ((n = fread(a, sizeof (a[0]), sizeof (a), fp)) > 0) {
	/* Process the bytes here. */

	/* If we read less than requested, we hit end of file or error. */
	if (n < sizeof (a))
		break;
}
```

Check the solution here:
:key: [read-file2.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/read-file2.c)

Also check manual page for `fread`() and ignore for now that the 1st argument is
of type `void *`, we will get there later.  As mentioned above, you can safely
put there an array or an address of a variable.

:wrench: Check the man page for `fwrite`() and modify the code so that what is
read from the file you write to some other file.  Do not remember to open the
output file for writing.  All the details are in the man page.

## Seeking

When reading/writing to a file using the above function, the current position
changes accordingly.  However, the position can be manipulated without
performing any I/O.

- `fseek` - moves the position
	- the `whence` parameter has 3 possible values and makes the `offset`
	  parameter relative to:
		- `SEEK_SET` - the beginning of the file
		- `SEEK_END` - the end of the file
		- `SEEK_CUR` - the current location of the cursor in the file
- `ftell` - get current position in the file


# Pointer size

```
int *p;
```

`sizeof (p)` is a size of a `p` variable which holds an address, which
corresponds to the **address size**.  In our case either 32 or 64 bits depending
on how your code was compiled.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
	int *p;

	printf("%zu\n", sizeof (p));
}
```

```
$ cc main.c
$ file a.out
a.out: Mach-O 64-bit executable x86_64
$ ./a.out
8
```

The `sizeof (*p)` is equivalent to `sizeof (int)` as that is what the type of
`*p` is.

# Arrays and pointers

In C, there is a strong relationship between arrays and pointers.  Most of the
time, you can use array notation with pointers, and pointer notation with
arrays, but **not always**.

By definition, the value of a variable or an expression of an array type is the
address of the first array element (an element zero).

```
int *pa;
int a[4] = { 1, 2, 3, 4 };

pa = &a[0];     // means &(a[0]) as [] is of higher precedence than &
pa = a;         // this gets the same result as above

p[0] = 3;	// the array is now { 3, 2, 3, 4 }
*(a + 1) = 5;	// the array is now { 3, 5, 3, 4 }
```

:heavy\_exclamation\_mark: As you can see, incrementing a pointer increments the
value **by the size of the object the pointer points to**.  Another example:

```
int a[] = { 0, 1, 2 };
int *p = a;

printf("%d\n", *(p + 2));       // will print 2
```

:eyes: [ptr-inc.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-inc.c)

:heavy\_exclamation\_mark: While you can work with arrays and pointers together,
**arrays are not pointers** and **pointers are not arrays**.  To work with a
pointer, the generated code must first get the value of the pointer variable,
then work with it.  With arrays, the generated code directly uses the memory
address the array starts at.  See below.

## Array identifiers (i.e. variables) are not modifiable

As just said, the generated code directly uses the memory address of an array.
So, you cannot do the following:

```
int a[1];
int aa[1];
++a;            // error
a = aa;         // error
```

When assigning to an array element, the compiler generates code that assigns to
a piece of memory representing the element using an offset from the beginning
of the array.

```C
int a[1];

a[0] = 15;
```

The generated assembler code (e.g. `objdump -d` from LLVM) for the above assigns
15 directly to the piece of memory on the stack (started by the base pointer
`rbp`) that represents the first array element.  That also hints that one cannot
assign to an array identifier in C as it would need a special semantics that
would not fit the way C works with arrays.

```
100000fa6:      c7 45 fc 0f 00 00 00    movl    $15, -4(%rbp)
```

:eyes: [array-var-not-modifiable.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-var-not-modifiable.c)

# Strings, arrays, and pointers

We already went through
[basics on strings](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/string.md)
and
[string literals.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/strings-and-string-constants.md)

Given that a string constant is internally used to initialize an array of
`char`s, and an array name represents its first element memory address, the
value of a string is an address of its first character.

:eyes: [string-literal-address.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/string-literal-address.c)

We already know that one can use an array notation with pointers.  So, if you
**really** wanted, you could do something like this:

```C
printf("%c\n", "hello, world"[1]);	// will print `e`
```

## Strings and pointers

Given that a string constant is a pointer to its first character, we can use it
like this:

```
char *p = "hello";

printf("%c\n", p[1]);   // will print 'e'
```

:eyes: [array-notation-with-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-notation-with-ptr.c)

:heavy\_exclamation\_mark: Pointer initialized with a string literal **may not**
be changed in the same way as an array.  The internal array created and
initialized from the string literal is in read-only by the specification.
Writing to it is an undefined behavior.  Writing to it with `gcc` and `clang`
will crash the program.  However, for example, [Oracle Developer
Studio](https://www.oracle.com/application-development/technologies/developerstudio.html)
used to put such arrays into read-write memory by default in older versions.
So, working code compiled with an older version of that compiler and modifying
string literals would crash if compiled with those other two.

:eyes: [string-literal-write.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/string-literal-write.c)

And as you can use a pointer notation with arrays (we already mentioned that the
array name is a synonym for the address of its first element), you can do this:

```
char a[] = "hello, world";

printf("%c\n", *(a + 1));       // will print 'e'
```

:eyes: [ptr-with-array-notation.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-with-array-notation.c)

# Valid pointer operations

Valid pointer operations are:

- assignment of pointers of the same type
- adding or subtracting a pointer and an integer
- subtracting or comparing two pointers to members of the same array
- assigning or comparing a pointer to zero

All other pointer arithmetic are invalid operations and may or may not trigger a
warning.

More specifically, assigning an integer to a pointer is not a valid operation,
usually you get a warning.

```C
int
main(void)
{
	int *p = 0x1234;        // is not a valid behavior
}
```

```
$ cc int-to-ptr.c
int-to-ptr.c:4:7: warning: incompatible integer to pointer conversion initializing 'int *' with an
      expression of type 'int' [-Wint-conversion]
        int *p = 0x1234;        // is not a valid behavior
             ^   ~~~~~~
1 warning generated.
```

:eyes: [int-to-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/int-to-ptr.c)

# Arrays as function arguments

:heavy\_exclamation\_mark: When an array name is passed to a function, what is
actually passed is the **address of the first element** and the local variable
representing the argument within the function is of a type of **pointer to the
array element**.  So, you can just declare the argument as an pointer to an
element type and pass in an array name.

The reason for this is that as C can only pass arguments by value, copying array
data to function arguments would be very inefficient.

Even if you declare a function argument as an array, **the argument is always
treated as a pointer**.  The optional array size is accepted but ignored.  Do
not use it as it is only confusing.  See for example *6.9.1 Function
definitions*, paragraph (10) in
[C99.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/c99-standard.md)

```C
void
myfn(int a[])
{
	/*
	 * 'a' here is a pointer to int, not an array of ints.  So, you can
	 * assign to it, for example (which you cannot do with an array).
	 */
	a = NULL;
}
```

:eyes: [array-as-argument.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-as-argument.c)

Some compilers even notice that the `sizeof` operator is applied on an array
passed into a function and produce a warning about it (clang with
`-Wsizeof-array-argument`).

```
$ clang -Wsizeof-array-argument array-as-argument.c
array-as-argument.c:15:25: warning: sizeof on array function parameter will
    return size of 'char *' instead of 'char [20]' [-Wsizeof-array-argument]
        printf("%zu\n", sizeof (a));
                               ^
array-as-argument.c:12:11: note: declared here
myfn(char a[20])
          ^
1 warning generated.
```

However, it only applies to the first array dimension.  That is, a
multi-dimensional array is just a 1-dimensional array of elements that are of an
array type.  Note that **we are getting ahead of ourselves a little bit here**,
more on that will be later, especially on reading more complex declarations.

:eyes: [passing-arrays.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/passing-arrays.c)

```
$ cc src/passing-arrays.c
src/passing-arrays.c:14:14: warning: incompatible pointer types passing 'int (*)[3]' to parameter of
      type 'int (*)[2]' [-Wincompatible-pointer-types]
        myfn(p2);       // will trigger a warning
             ^~
src/passing-arrays.c:2:10: note: passing argument to parameter 'a' here
myfn(int a[2][2])
         ^
1 warning generated.
```

# Calling by value vs calling by reference

In C, function arguments are always passed by value.  To change a value of an
argument, thus emulating a calling by reference, you need to pass pointers.
That means, you pass a pointer by value so that you know what piece of memory to
modify.

The following will **not** do what one might naively assume it would.  What you
actually swap are values on a stack or in registers while the original objects
were left untouched.

```
int
swap(int a, int b)
{
	int n = a;

	a = b;
	b = n;
}
```

:eyes: [swap-by-value.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/swap-by-value.c)

:wrench: modify the code above so that `swap`() that actually swaps the values
of the two `int`s.  Hint: aside from the *dererence* operator `*`, you will also
need the *address-of* operator `&` - see
[pointer basics](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/pointers.md)

:key: [swap-by-reference.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/swap-by-reference.c)


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## File of integers

:wrench: get a file size using the standard IO API (that is, `lseek(2)` is
prohibited even if you know it).

:wrench: create array of `int` values (of arbitrary positive length with values
ranging from `INT_MAX` to `0`), write the array to a file, read the values
into another array and print them to the standard error.
Between the writing and reading the file handle has to remain open. Use the
same file handle for reading and writing.
Use `od(1)` to verify the content of the file (thus it is handy to start with
`INT_MAX` and e.g. divide by 2 for each successive value).

:key: [fopen-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fopen-binary.c)

:wrench: use the file created by the previous program. Read the values from the
end of the file to the beginning of the file one by one without knowing the file
size and print the numbers to the standard error output.

## File read

:wrench: create a text file where each line begins with integer followed
by space and a string, e.g.:
```
42 towel
13 dwarfs and Snow White
```
Read the file using `fscanf()` and print the values (i.e. integer and a string)
from each line to standard output.

## Implement a function

Write a function that copies a string to a character array, including the
terminating null character.  It returns the number of characters copied.

Note that **a string constant is read-only by definition**, and writing to it is
an undefined behavior.  That is:

```
char *s = "hello"
// Do not do this.  Different compilers may act differently.
s[0] = 'H';
```

To write the function, take
:eyes: [implement-function.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/implement-function.c)
and implement it there.  See the comment inside.

Verify the code prints exactly what it says in the comments.  `gcc -Wall -Wextra
implement-function.c` **must** be clear of any warnings.

:key: [implement-function-solution.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/implement-function-solution.c)

