
Topics: ternary operator, arithmetic type conversions, negative numbers, integer
overflows, compiler warning options

# recap

- arrays
- functions
- strings

# More on functions/arrays

  - variable length array (VLA)
    - automatically allocated based on a variable value.  Only for local
      variables, not globals. Same warning applies w.r.t. array size and stack
      growth as with fixed width arrays.
```C
	void fn(int n)
	{
	    int a[n];
	    ...
	}
```

  - history: you may still see in very old code: K&R definition with
    types of arguments on separate line(s):
```C
    int
    foo(a, b)
    int a; int b;
    {
	      /* body */
    }
```
  - some compilers have dropped the support for K&R definitions or will drop
    soon

  - variable shadowing
    - :eyes: [shadow.c](src/shadow.c), [shadow-block.c](src/shadow-block.c)

  - if the function is declared `static`, it is visible only from the same
    object file

    - static variables: retain value across function calls
    - yes, the word `static` is overloaded in C

  - functions can have variable number of arguments of different types (more on
    that later)
    - the three dots are named ellipsis
```
    void func(fmt, ...);
```

   - the first argument describes the rest of arguments in some way
      - usually it is a format string.  It could possibly be an argument
	count if they were of the same type however in that case they
	would probably be passed as an pointer (we will get to pointers
	in a later class).

  - like array, function is not a first class object (i.e. no "functor" like in
    functional languages)
    - that said, there are pointers to functions (more on these later)

# warmup

## Mountain scenery generator

A very simple moutain generator.  At every iteration you go either straight
(`-`), up (`/`), or down (`\`).  The program generates something like the
following:

```
$ a.out
               /                         /--
            / / \- /--                  /   \                       / /-
           / \    \   \              /--     \-                   /- \  \
          /            \            /          \             /-- /       \
      / /-              \-  /--   /-            \-          /   \         \
     / \                  \-   \ /                \-  /-- /-
    /                           \                   \-   \
 /--
-
```

You will need a two-dimensional array to fill, then print.  Use `memset()` to
initialize the array with spaces.  Check the man page for `memset()`.  For
random numbers, use `rand()` and `%` for modulo.  To initialize the random
generator, use `sranddev()` if you have it, or `srand(time(NULL))`.  Check the
documentation if unsure (each function is supposed to have its manual page).

BTW, there is no language construct to initialize all elements of an array with
a specific non-zero value.  You can only zero it out using an initializer `{ 0
}`, as we already know.

The algorithm goes from left to the right, one character at a time. At each
point it will decide whether the mountain will grow, descend or remain the same
(hence the random numbers).

Once you got a working program, restructure the code into small functions (one
for printing a character based on random number, one for printing the whole 2-D
array, etc.). Optionally you can try to avoid  global variables by passing the
array as parameter of function - however keep in mind that arrays cannot be
passed as value so the array dimensions will have to be passed as function
parameters as well.

### variant: nicer mountain

You can make it more complicated and make the ascii art smoother.  For example,
you can define that after `/` you cannot go down with `\` but you could do `/\`,
etc.  You would need to keep a state of the previous character.  You could
generate something like this (use your imagination):

```
            .
           / \
          /   \__
      /\_/       \__/|
     /               |
    /                |__/............................
  _/
```

### variant: mountain range

The top-level function (`mountain()`) can be also called with the array (and its
dimensions) as input and you can try calling it multiple times to see if a
mountain range can be generated.

  solution: [mountain-generator.c](src/mountain-generator.c)

# Ternary operator

```
    cond ? expr1 : expr 2
```
same as
```
    if (cond) expr else expr2
```    
e.g.
```
    max = (i > j) ? i : j;
```    
note that if we add a semicolon, an expression becomes a statement, e.g.:
```
      (i == j) ? i++ : j++;
```
will increment i or j. the parens are not needed but generally
used for better readability.

code: :eyes: [ternary-assign.c](src/ternary-assign.c)

---

:wrench: write an expression that returns maximum of 3 integers i,j,k using
ternary operator

  - do not use any macros

solution: [3max.c](src/3max.c)

## quiz

see the code in :eyes: [ternary.c](src/ternary.c)

  - is this possible to do with ternary operator ?
  - how would you fix it ?
  - the usual solution is to put this into macro. many libraries/programs
    define their own MAX/MIN macros.

# Arithmetic type conversions

In (very) general, if *binary* operators have operands of different types, the
"lower" is promoted to "upper".  Eg. if one operand is a long double, the other
operand is promoted to a long double.

What is more, char and short int operands are converted to ints, and to unsigned
ints if they do not fit in an int.  That conversion is called *integer
promotion*.  This is done to make the runtime fast (on x86 32-bit arithmetics
can be much faster than when using 16-bit operands).

sizeof (1) is 4 because 1 is an int.  However, if a number does not fit to an
int, a higher type will be used.  For example, 4294967296 (2^32) will be stored
in 8 bytes, and "sizeof (4294967296)" is 8.

Examples (assuming `char c;` declaration);
- sizeof (999) is 4 as "999" is an integer by definition.
- sizeof (c) is 1
- sizeof (c + c) is 4 as "+" is a binary operator and the integer promotion
  kicks in
- sizeof (++c) is still 1 as `++` is an unary operator for which the integer
  promotion rules do not apply.  However, they do apply for unary `+` and `-`.
- sizeof (1LL) will usually be 8 as "long long" is usually 8 bytes.

It gets more interesting if unsigned and signed are involved.  Eg. a signed int
is promoted to an unsigned int if one of the operands is unsigned.

The above is called "implicit type conversion". There is also "explicit type
conversion" (called "casting") which we will deal with later.

I suggest you try these out with `printf("%zu", ...)`.  `%zu` (see "man 3
printf") matches the return type of the `sizeof` operand.  The exact unsigned
numeric type of what `sizeof` returns may differ in different implementations so
`%zu` will work anywhere.

# Negative numbers

Negative numbers are usually stored in two's complement (however, that is
implementation defined by the standard).  See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two's\_complement

In short, you take an absolute value, create one's complement and add 1.  There
are several advantages, one is that there is only 1 zero (not negative and
positive zero if we used the highest bit to track the sign).  That is why a
signed char, for example, can hold -128 to 127, and not just -127 to 127.

For a char:
```
 10000000	-128
 ........
 11111101	  -3
 11111110	  -2      ^
 11111111	  -1      |
 --------------------------
 00000000	   0      |
 00000001	   1      v
 00000010	   2
 ........
 01111111	 127
```

On Unix systems the shell reports the -1 return value as 255 in `echo $?`.  Even
though the `main()` returns integer (4 bytes), the shell takes just low 8 bits
and interprets them as unsigned quantity.

  code: :eyes: [return-1.c](src/return-1.c)

If long is 8 bytes, and an int 4, then `-1L < 1U` as you might expect.

However, `-1 > 1U` because -1 is promoted to unsigned.  Two's complement
representation of -1 is (see the paragraph above):
```
(1) take absolute value of 1	00000000.00000000.00000000.00000001
(2) one's complement		11111111.11111111.11111111.11111110
(3) add 1 to get 2's complement	11111111.11111111.11111111.11111111
```
which is 2^32 - 1 when interpreted as unsigned quantity.

Just `printf("%u\n", -1)` to see it will print 4294967295 (use the unix/linux
`bc` command and type `2^32-1` to verify).

  code: :eyes: [signed-plus-unsigned.c](src/signed-plus-unsigned.c),
  [signed-to-unsigned.c](src/signed-to-unsigned.c)

The assymetry of the negative/positive interval can lead to the program crashing
on architectures that detect it. This is consequence of hardware handling rather
than the language.

  code: :eyes: [crashme.c](src/crashme.c)
    - run with `-INT_MIN` (see limits.h) and -1.  `INT_MIN` is usually
      -2147483648.
    - works in 64-bit mode as well due to int being passed in 32-bit registers

```
	$ cc -m64 crashme.c
	$ ./a.out 2147483648 -1
	-2147483648 -1
	Floating point exception: 8
	$ echo $?
	136
	$ kill -l 136
	FPE

	$ cc -m32 crashme.c
	$ ./a.out 2147483648 -1
	2147483647 -1
	$
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- what is the result if `0xff` `signed char` and `0xff` `unsigned char` are
  compared using the `==` operator ?
  - write down the hexadecimal representation of the integers corresponding to
    the 2 chars with `printf()`

code: :eyes: [int-promotion.c](src/int-promotion.c)
      - note that if the b char was defined as `char b` the result might be 1
        because it is up to the compiler to choose whether char will be signed
	or unsigned.  Usually it is signed though.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- another quiz. Will the program print the whole array ?
  - try to come up with reason of the expected behavior before running the
    program.

  code: :wrench: [whole-array.c](src/whole-array.c)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- when passing char to a function parameter declared as int, in 32-bit mode
  (`-m32`) it will be pushed as 32-bit value on the stack. This is not integer
  promotion but x86 ABI (Application Binary Interface)

code: :eyes: [x86-ABI.c](src/x86-ABI.c), [x86-ABI-2.c](src/x86-ABI-2.c)

  - for those who understand assembly run this with `-S` to see the differences
    between 32-bit and 64-bit mode, and the difference between when func()
    is defined with `int a` or `char a`

# Compiler warnings

- each compiler has its own set of warnings that usually give a clue that
  something strange and potentially harmful can happen.
  - there are differences between various compilers
  - will focus on GCC here
  - during the old days the tool producing these warnings was called 'lint'

  - the basic: `-Wall -Wextra`
    - `-Wall` catches things like missing return value from a function that
      should return one

      code: :eyes: [no-return.c](src/no-return.c)

    - there are many places where a beginner can shoot himself into a foot
      by not knowing the language intricacies.
      - e.g. variable cannot be modified more than once between sequencing
	points. The `-Wsequence-point` that is included in `-Wall` warns about
	that

      code: :eyes: [sequence-point-violation.c](src/sequence-point-violation.c)

  - the `-Wshadow` can catch shadow variables overriding:

    code: :eyes: [shadow.c](src/shadow.c), [shadow-block.c](src/shadow-block.c)

  - all or specific warnings can be turned into errors: `-Werrror` or
    `-Werror=<insert_specific_error>` , respectively
    - unless the warnings contain false positives (and those can usually be
      suppressed) this will help to avoid troubles later

  - there are other means to check for correctness (static/dynamic analysis),
    more on those later

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* go through the programs written so far and run the compiler using the
  `-Wall -Wextra` options.
  - what kind of problems did you discover ? how to fix them ?
    - see e.g. whole-array.c example above (where only -Wextra gives some clue)

# Integer overflow

- what happens if int overflows ?
  - the behavior of overflow depends on whether the type is signed or unsigned
    - for signed types the behavior is undefined ! i.e. you cannot rely on
      overflow of positive quantity in signed int will be turned into
      negative number on overflow ! Some compilers will allow to specify the
      behavior of signed overflows using special options (`-fwrapv` for GCC), though.
    - for unsigned, the overflow will wrap around (modulo power of 2)

  code: :eyes: [int-overflow.c](src/int-overflow.c),
  [unsigned-overflow.c](src/unsigned-overflow.c)

    - use `-fstrict-overflow -Wstrict-overflow` (will become active only
      for higher optimization levels, i.e. `-O<X>` where `X > 1`) to stay on the safe side

# Home assignments :wrench:

## Conway 1D

write a 1-D implementation of Conway's life 
  - use rule 30 (http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Rule30.html) to determine the next
  - use two arrays (one 2-D and one 1-D) to represent the rules and its
    resulting values
    - there are 8 rules, each has 3 values to compare against and one result
  - we now have the arsenal to write 2-D variant however to display 2-D
    world some way to refresh the terminal would be needed so we will stick
    with 1-D.
    - use `\r` to reset the line between iterations
    - sleep for 1 second between iterations (`unistd.h` is needed for that)
  - each life "tick" will print the line representing the world
  - use functions to refactor the code
  - once having a working solution, try to rewrite it to be more efficient
    or elegant, send the link to your implementation on Github to the mailing
    list
 
 ## toupper
    
rewrite the "convert small characters to upper case" program from last time using:
  - a) function
  - b) function using ternary operator (single line of code)

  - there is a `toupper()` library function from C99 so use mytoupper()

  - variant: do this via lookup table - array
     - arrays passed as function argument are in reality converted to pointers
       (to be introduced later)
       - so it is useless to write their size like this:
```C
         void func(int array[3]);
```
- this is better:
```C
         void func(int array[], size_t size);
```
  - also, if the items in the array are changed in the function,
         they will be changed in the array itself (consequence of pointer
         conversion)

  - what if `conv_to_upper(-1)` ?
  - short is sufficient to store the value:
```C
    short uppper[] = { 'A', 'B', ... };
```

solution: [toupper.c](src/toupper.c)

## byte count to human readable string

 write function to convert `uint64_t` to human readable count
  (binary - see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orders\_of\_magnitude\_(data) or
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mebibyte, e.g. MiB as mebibyte, etc.) and print
  it to standard output

```C
  void bytecnt2str(uint64_t num);
```

  - use character array to represent the magnitude letters and perform
    the lookup based on the actual magnitude
  - if there is a remainder, write a '+' following the number
  - write the output in single printf() (use ternary operator for the remainder)

  - example inputs/outputs:
```
1024		1 KiB
1025		1+ KiB
2047		1+ KiB
2048		2 KiB
2049		2+ KiB
5242880		5 MiB
```
  solution: [bytecnt2str.c](src/bytecnt2str.c)

## Offset checker

write a function that will have this prototype:

```C
  bool check(long off, size_t size, size_t limit);
```
  - the `bool` type exists since C99, use the `stdbool.h` include
  - that will check if the arguments are valid for accessing part of file (no
    operations will be done, just the check) of size 'size' starting from offset
    'off'. The length of the file is given by 'limit'.

```
    |           |         |              |
    0          off     off+size        limit
```

  - try to capture all corner cases of what could go wrong with the values
    and return `false` on failure, `true` on success.

  solution: [range-check.c](src/range-check.c)

  - on Unix systems one would use `ssize_t` for the offset which is signed
    integer type of the same size as `size_t` (this is not part of C99 but
    POSIX)

  - also, implement set of test values in `main()` using array
