
Topics: Integer promotion, integer conversion, arithmetic conversions

We will be citing the standard in the text below.  See [the
standard](c99-standard.md) for the PDF.

# recap

- variable length array
- variable shadowing / scope
- static variable / function
- functions with variable number of arguments
- integer conversions
- negative numbers
- compiler warnings
- ternary operator

# :wrench: Warm-up (30 minutes)

Implement functionality provided by the following commands with the specific
options.  Just hardcode the parameter in the code, e.g.
```
#define	CHAR_DO_DEL	'x'
```
See the tr(1) manual page if unsure.

## Variant 1: delete single char (`tr -d '<char>'`)

Example:
```
	$ cat /etc/passwd | tr -d r > output
	$ cat /etc/passwd | ./a.out > output2
	$ diff output output2
	$ echo $?
	0
```

## Variant 2: delete multiple chars (`tr -d "<chars>"`)

Solution: :eyes: [tr-d-chars.c](src/tr-d-chars.c) for `"tr -d ro"`

Note that for `"tr -d ro"` the passwd root line will start with `t:...` as the
`"roo"` string will get deleted.

## Variant 3: squeeze single char (`tr -s "<char>"`)

## Variant 4: squeeze multiple chars (`tr -s "<chars>"`)

# Common mistakes

We noticed several times already that you may end up doing the following:
```
#define	MYDEF = 3
```
And you hit a syntax error when `MYDEF` is used later in the code.

What happens?  A preprocessor replaces occurences of `MYDEF` with whatever is
after `MYDEF`, separated from it with a sequence of white spaces (tabs, spaces,
newlines if escaped).

In the case above, `MYDEF` will be literary replaced with `= 3`.

Check with `gcc -E` (or `cpp`) which stops after the preprocessor phase (ie. it
does NOT compile anything).  The following is in :eyes
[common-mistake-with-define.c](src/common-mistake-with-define.c):

```	#define MYDEF = 3

	if (i < MYDEF) {
		// ...
	}
```
The code above will end up in a syntax error as `i < = 3` is not a correct
expression in C (because of the space between `<` and `=`).
```
	$ gcc -E common-mistake-with-define.c 
	...
	...

	if (i < = 3) {

	}
```

# Functions with variable arguments

:wrench: write a function that takes variable number of ULL arguments
  and returns their sum

  - use the stdarg(3) man page
  - what happens if there is a one `int` value passed in between the `ULL`
    arguments ?

solution: [stdarg.c](src/stdarg.c)

# Finishing integers from the previous lecture

## Various conversions and promotions

NOTE: the following is a simplified version of what is in the standard.  You
need to consult the specification if unsure.  See above for the PDF link.

## Integer promotion vs integer conversion vs arithmetic conversions

Integer promotion: `char` -> `int`; `short` -> `int`; or both to `unsigned int`
if the value does not fit a `signed int` (may happen if a `short int` is of the
same size as an `int`, and `unsigned short` is used).

Integer conversion: converting integers (eg. assigning a `signed long` to an
`unsigned char`, or assigning an `unsigned int` to a `signed char`)

Arithmetic conversion: many operators cause conversions.  The effect is to bring
the operands into a common type **before** the operator is applied.  For
example:

```C
	int i;
	unsigned long long ll;

	i + ll;		// resulting type is long long and 'i'
			// is converted to unsigned long long
			// BEFORE '+' is applied.  See below
			// what happens if 'i' contains a
			// negative number...
```
## Integer Promotion

Integer promotion (ie. we promote chars and shorts only here) usually happens
with binary and ternary operators before arithmetic conversion happens.  It
sometimes happens with unary operators as well.  You need to consult the
specification.  For example:

```
++ and --	*NO* integer promotion
! (negation)	*NO* integer promotion
+ and -		integer promotion happens
```
That means for `char c`:
```C
sizeof (c)	// is	1
// Note that 'c' is NOT incremented/decremented here.  The expression in sizeof
// is never evaluated, only the size in bytes needed to store the value if it
// was evaluated is returned.  You will get a warning from the compiler about
// code that has no effect.
sizeof (++c)	// is	1
sizeof (--c)	// is	1
sizeof (!c)	// is	1
sizeof (+c)	// is	4
sizeof (-c)	// is	4
sizeof (c + 1)	// is	4
// ...
```
### printing `sizeof` value

Remember, to `printf` a value of `sizeof`, use it like the following (the
`sizeof` result is always unsigned, and the 'z' modifier makes sure its size
(usually 4 or 8 bytes) matches the implementation, ie. whatever `size_t` is):
```C
	printf("%zu\n", sizeof (c));
```
Consult the `printf` man page if unsure about printf conversions and modifiers.

Integer promotion also happens in arguments of variadic functions (eg.
`printf`).  That is why the following works as expected:
```C
	char c = 'A';
	printf("%c", c);
```
printf(3) man page says:

```
        c	The int argument is converted to an unsigned char, and the
		resulting character is written.
```

So it means that `%c` expects an int but we put a char there.  However, since
an integer promotion is applied, 'c' is converted to int **before** it is used as an
argument to `printf()`.

## Integer conversion

This is about converting integers only.

There are three parts when converting integers:

  1. assigning an integer to another integer while the source value fits into
  the target -> the result is specified by the standard.  It's the same value.

  2. assigning any integer to an unsigned integer -> result specified by the
  standard, see congruency below.

  3. assigning an integer to a signed integer and the value does NOT fit ->
  standard says the result is implementation-defined.

*Implementation-defined* means the implementation (ie. the compiler) must choose
how to behave in such a situation and **must** document it.  See the spec,
section 3.4.1, for the precise definition.

### integer to unsigned integer

The C89 specificiation says the following about assigning to an unsigned type:

```
        Any integer is converted to a given unsigned type by finding
	the smallest non-negative value that is congruent to that
	integer, modulo one more than the largest value that can be
	represented in the unsigned type. In a two's complement
	representation, this is equivalent to left-truncation if the
	bit pattern of the unsigned type is narrower, and to
	zero-filling unsigned values and sign-extending signed values
	if the unsigned type is wider.
```

What is a congruency relation ? It's quite simple but the language above might
sound complicated. Consult https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congruence\_relation

In our case, the mod part will be either 256 (assigning to char), 65536
(assigning to short), 2^32 (to int or long), or 2^64 (to long or long long).

However, in C99, the language was converted to something more readable
and understandable.  Technically it is the same thing as congruency
modulo though:

```
	6.3.1.3 Signed and unsigned integers

	...

	"...if the new type is unsigned, the value is converted by
	repeatedly adding or subtracting one more than the maximum
	value that can be represented in the new type until the value
	is in the range of the new type."
```

Use bc(1) to work with big numbers:

```
	$ bc
	2^32
	4294967296
	(2^32 + 17) % 2^16
	17
	...
	...
```

So, the following are congruent:

	1 :: 257 (mod 256)		(in C99: 1 + 256 == 257)
	2 :: 258 (mod 256)		(in C99: 2 + 256 == 258)
	232 :: 1000 (mod 256)		(in C99: 232 + 3*256 == 1000)
	-24 :: 1000 (mod 256)		(in C99: -24 + 4*256 == 1000)
	-17 :: 4294967279 (mod 2^32)	(in C99: -17 + 2^32 == 4294967279)
	...

Examples:
```C
	/* 'c' will be 24 */
	unsigned char c;
	c = -1000;		// 24 :: -1000 (mod 256)

	/* 'i' will be 4294967286 */
	unsigned int i;
	i = -10;		// -10 :: 4294967286 (mod 2^32)
```

### assign to signed type when the value does not fit

The C89 specification says the following (however, see the full C99 text below)
about assigning to a signed type (capitalization is mine):

```
	When any integer is converted to a signed type, the value is
	unchanged if it can be represented in the new type and is
	IMPLEMENTATION-DEFINED OTHERWISE.
```

For gcc, that implementation defined behavior is documented on
https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Integers-implementation.html

```
	- The result of, or the signal raised by, converting an
	  integer to a signed integer type when the value cannot be
	  represented in an object of that type (C90 6.2.1.2, C99 and
	  C11 6.3.1.3):

		For conversion to a type of width N, the value is
		reduced modulo 2^N to be within range of the type; no
		signal is raised.
```

So, with gcc (and probably any other compilers you might meet today), this means
the congruency is applied again:
```C
	signed char c = 129; // 129 :: -127 (mod 256), ie. -127 will be in 'c'
```
All of -383, -127, and 385 are congruent with 129 mod 256 but only -127 fits a
signed char.  That is why 'c' will be -127 then.
```
	...
	129 :: -383 (mod 256)
	129 :: -127 (mod 256)
	129 :: 385 (mod 256)
	...
```
printf's "hh" modifier is for printing a char, "h" for a short.
```C
	/* This will print 1 if compiled with gcc. */
	int i = 257;
	printf("%hhd\n", i);
```
The compiler will still warn you though to let you know that your int might be
truncated:

	fak.c:10:19: warning: format specifies type 'char' but the argument has
		     type 'int' [-Wformat]
        printf("%hhd\n", i);
                ~~~~     ^
                %d

### generic integer conversion algorithm

BTW, when mentioning above those three parts when converting integers, it does
not hurt to cite the C99 standard in full on this.  The following section covers
all the integer conversions we went through above.  The below mentioned
"implementation-defined signal" might be to print an error and exit, for
example.

	6.3.1.3 Signed and unsigned integers

	1 When a value with integer type is converted to another
	  integer type other than _Bool, if the value can be
	  represented by the new type, it is unchanged.

	2 Otherwise, if the new type is unsigned, the value is
	  converted by repeatedly adding or subtracting one more than
	  the maximum value that can be represented in the new type
	  until the value is in the range of the new type. 49)

	3 Otherwise, the new type is signed and the value cannot be
	  represented in it; either the result is
	  implementation-defined or an implementation-defined signal
	  is raised.

Example: :eyes: [integer-conversion.c](src/integer-conversion.c)

## Arithmetic conversion

Simply put, arithmetic conversion is about converting all arguments of an
operator to the smallest common type BEFORE the operator is applied.  That
includes arithmetic operators as well as logical operators (>, <, <=, ==, >=)

Example:
```C
	char c;
	signed int i;
	unsigned int u;
	long long ll;

	c + i + u + ll;
```
We will learn about associativity later, but accept that the compiler
actually assumes the following:
```C
	((c + i) + u) + ll)
```
What happens:

	1) c is converted to int based on Integer Promotion
	2) so the result type of (c + i) is int
	3) that result is converted to unsigned int because of 'u' based on
	   Integer Conversion we just introduced above.
	4) result type of (c + i + u) is then an unsigned int
	5) the result from 4) is then converted to long long because of 'll'
	6) long long is the type of the result of the whole expression

Note that at every step, Integer Conversion rules are applied.

Specifically, an unsigned integer type is "bigger" than the corresponding signed
type.
```C
	int i;
	unsigned int u;

	i + u;		// 'i' is first converted to unsigned int
```
That is why "-1 > 1U" is TRUE since "-1" is first converted to an unsigned int,
ie.  "-1" is converted into "2^32-1", ie. 4294967295, and the expression is then
evaluated as:
```C
	(4294967295U > 1U)
```
Ternary operator also first converts its arguments to a common type no matter
which branch will be returned.  For example:
```C
	unsigned int i = 0 ? 1U : -1;
	printf("%u\n", i);		// will print 2^32-1 (ie. 4294967295)
```
However, if you do this:
```C
	int i = 0 ? 1U : -1;
```
Then the result of the ternary expression is 4294967295 but then it
is converted to a signed int.  And 4294967295 does not fit an int whose range in
two's complement (gcc) is [-2^31, 2^31-1].  So, congruency to the rescue and we
get -1:

	-1 :: 4294967295 (mod 2^32)	// (-1 + 4294967295) == 2^32

	== 8< ==
	int
	main(void)
	{
		int i = 0 ? 1U : -1;
		printf("%d\n", i);
	}
	== 8< ==

The compiler will warn you though as you are triggering something that
is implementation defined:

	== 8< ==
	$ cc main.c
	"main.c", line 6: warning: initializer does not fit or is out of
	range: 0xffffffff
	$ ./a.out
	-1
	== 8< ==

## Signed numbers

The spec does NOT say how signed numbers are internally stored.  That is just an
implementation detail.  There are other ways to do it than via the two's
complement on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signed\_number\_representations

However, gcc, clang, and all other compilers you probably ever meet use two's
complement, as documented on
https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Integers-implementation.html

	== 8< ==
	-  Whether signed integer types are represented using sign and
	   magnitude, two's complement, or one's complement, and
	   whether the extraordinary value is a trap representation or
	   an ordinary value (C99 and C11 6.2.6.2).

		GCC supports only two's complement integer types, and
		all bit patterns are ordinary values.
	== 8< ==

# Assignment to practice your knowledge

Try to figure out using bc(1) and what you have just learned what will be in the
variables:

```C
/*
 * Let's assume that:
 *
 *      short int is 2 bytes
 *      int is 4 bytes
 *      long is 8 bytes
 *      long long is 8 bytes
 *
 * Compile with "gcc -m64" to match the above.
 *
 * Let's assume that we use gcc that uses modulo to fit when assigning to a
 * signed integer.
 *
 * Include <limits.h> for INT_MIN (-2^31).
 */

/*
 * Use bc(1) to manually compute the values of the left sides.  When done,
 * incorporate into the C code, compile, and verify you got it right.
 */

unsigned long long ll = -13;            // Use %llu in printf() to verify.
signed char c = 999;                    // %d
short int si = -1;                      // %hd
unsigned int = -1;                      // %u
unsigned short int usi = 999999;        // %hu
signed char c = 0 ? -10 : 0U;           // %d
signed char c = -1 ? -10 : 0U;          // %d
long long ll = 1U + -10;                // %lld
unsigned long long ull = 1U + -10;      // %llu
unsigned short int si = INT_MIN + 13LU; // %hu
signed char c = 129;                    // %d

/* What is printed? */
printf("%hhu\n", -3);
printf("0x%hhx\n", -3);
printf("%c\n", 321);
printf("%c\n", -191);
```

Also check the following code and try to figure out what is gonna be printed
before actually building and executing the code:

  :eyes: [int-promotion.c](src/int-promotion.c)

Now you also know everything you need to know to figure out what happens in the
following code.  Hint, not all elements are printed as it seems from the first
look.  Another hint -- sizeof's type is unsigned, and the logical operator
triggers the Arithmetic Conversion, see above.

  :eyes: [whole-array.c](src/whole-array.c)
