
topics: expressions and statements, err/warn functions, strings, for loop

# Strings

- "xxx" is called a *string literal* or a *string constant*

- in memory it is a consecutive piece of memory: `'x' 'x' 'x' '\0'`

- `'\0'` terminates the string.  That's the C convention.

- `'\0'` is called a `NUL` character.  It's just a 0 byte but the convention is
  to use `'\0'` if it represents a string element.  `'\0'` is just a special
  case of octal representation `'\0ooo'` where 'o' is an octal figure (0-7).

- aside from { 'x', ... }, character array initialization may be done also with
  string literal:

```C
	/* sizeof (a) is 6 as the terminating 0 is counted in */
	char a[] = "hello";
```

- if {} is used, you must add the terminating zero yourself unless you use the
  size of the array and the string was shorter (in which case the rest would be
  initialized to zero):

```C
	char s[] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0' };
```

  Anyway, you would probably never do it this way.  Just use `= "hello"`.

  code: array-fill.c

- string is printed via printf as "%s"

```C
	printf("%s\n", "hello, world");
```

- experiment with what "%5s" and "%.5s" do (use any reasonable number)

code: string-format.c

# warmup

task:

  - extend the program tr-d-chars.c from last time to translate character input
    e.g.

    tail /etc/passwd | tr 'abcdefgh' '123#'

  - use character arrays defined with string literals to represent the 2 strings
    - see the tr(1) man page on what needs to happen if the 1st string is longer
      than the 2nd
      - do not store the expanded 2nd string as literal in your program !

  code: tr.c

task (bonus): refactor the code into function
		- remember that arrays are passed into function as a pointer (to
		  be explained soon, not needed now) that can be used inside the
		  function with array subscript


# the "for" loop 

formally defined:
```
  for (<init>; <predicate>; <update>)
	  <body>
```
  - it is the same as:
```
  <init>
  while (<predicate>) {
	  <body>
	  <update>
  }
```
  - Using the for loop is very often easier and more readable.

  Example:
```C
  int i;
  for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
	  printf("%d\n", i);
```
  - or in C99:
```C
  for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
	  printf("%d\n", i);
```
  - if 'break' jump statement happens in the body, the control is transferred to
    the end of the loop without executing the <update>
  - with 'continue' jump statement, the rest of the body is skipped.
    The <update> is then performed for the "for" loop but not for the "while"
    loop.
  - both break and continue relate to the loop they are executed in

code: for.c

task: compute minimum of averages of lines in 2-D integer array (of arbitrary
      dimensions) that have positive values.

      code: 2darray-min-avg.c

# expressions

"In mathematics, an expression or mathematical expression is a finite
combination of symbols that is well-formed according to rules that depend on
the context."

In C, expressions are, amongst others, variables, constants, strings, and
expressions in parentheses.  Also arithmetic expressions, relational
expressions, function calls, sizeof, assignments, and ternary expression.

  http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/expressions

In C99, expression can produce results (2+2 gets 4) or generate side effects
(printf("foo") sends string literal to standard output).

code: expression-statement.c

task: make the warning an error with your choice of compiler (would be a variant
      of -W in GCC)


# statements

Statements are (only from what we already learned), expressions, selections
("if", "switch" (not introduced yet)), {} blocks (known as "compounds"),
iterations, and jumps ("goto" (not introduced yet), "continue", "break",
"return").

  http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/statements

Basically, statements are pieces of code executed in sequence. The function body
is a compound statement. The compound statement (a.k.a. block) is a sequence of
statements and declarations. Blocks can be nested. Blocks inside function body
are good for variable reuse.

Semicolon is not used after a compound but it is allowed.

A declaration is NOT a statement (there are subtle consequences, we can show
them later).

Some statements must end with ';'.  Eg., expression statements.  The following
are all valid statements.  Do not make much sense though.  They will probably
generate a warning about an unused result.

	char c;

	c;
	1 + 1;
	1000;
	"hello";


code: null-statement.c, compound-statement.c

## w.r.t. compound statement vs. expression:

 - it is not allowed to have compound statement within expression
   - that said, GCC has a language extension (gcc99) that can be used to allow
     this - the reason is for protecting multiple evaluation within macros
   - the C99 standard does not define this, therefore it's not there

- gotcha: the code has to be compiled with gcc with the -pedantic-errors
  	  option in order to reveal the problem

  gcc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic-errors compound-statement-invalid.c

  - our recommendation is to always use these options

code: compound-statement-invalid.c

# err() family of functions

  - not defined by any standard however handy
  - present in BSD, glibc, Solaris, etc.
  - use <err.h> include, see the err(3) man page
  - this is especially handy when working with I/O
  - instead of writing:

  if (error) {
  	fprintf(stderr, "error occured: %s\n", strerror(errno));
	exit(1);
  }

    - write this:

      if (error)
             errx(1, "error occured: ");


  - notice it is not necessary to use newline
  - or for functions that do not modify the errno value:

  if (some_error)
  	errx(1, "ERROR: %d", some_error);

  - there's also warn()/warnx() that do not exit the program


# Pointers

Motivation:
  - memory allocation / shared memory
  - protocol buffer parsing
  - pointer arithmetics

  - the value stored in "pointer" variable is the address of the memory
    storing given type
  - declared like this, e.g.

    int *p; // pointer to int

    - note on style:

      int * p;
      int *p;  // preferred in this lecture

    - good practice is to prefix pointers with the 'p' letter

  - it is always associated with a type

  - the value of the pointer to variable is retrieved using
    de-reference operator * :

    printf("%d", *p);

  - the de-reference is also used to write value to the variable pointed:

    *p = 5;

  - in definition assign like this:

    int i = 5;
    int *p = &i;

    - the & is reference operator and gets the address of the variable.

  - the pointer itself is obviously stored in memory too
```
     +---------------+
     |     addr2     |
     +---------------+
     ^                        +-------+
     |                        | value |
   addr1                      +-------+
                              ^
                              |
                            addr2

```
  - the size of the pointer depends on architecture and the way the program
    was compiled (see -m32 / -m64 command line switches of gcc)

    - sizeof (p) will return the amount of memory to store the pointer
    - sizeof (*p) will return the amount needed to store the domain type

Task: write a program to print:
      - address of the pointer
      - the address where it points to
      - the value of the pointed to variable

      Use the %p formatting for the first two.

Code: ptr-basics.c

## NULL pointer

  - the real danger with pointers is that invalid access results in crash
    (the program is terminated by kernel)

    - this is because NULL address is left unmapped on purpose.  C guarantees
      that zero is never a valid address for data.

  - can assign an address directly to a pointer (that might trigger a warning
    though.  We will get to casting and how to fix that later).

    int *p = 0x1234;

  - special pointer value - NULL (it's called "a null pointer constant" in the
    spec)

Task: create NULL pointer and try to read from it / write to it

Code: null-ptr.c

## Basic operations

  - notice the difference:

    int i;
    int *p = &i;

    vs.

    int i;
    int *p;
    p = &i; // set value of the pointer (i.e. the address where it points to)

  - operator precedence gotcha:

    *p		- value of the pointed to variable
    *p + 1      - the value + 1
    *(p + 1)    - the value on the address + 1 (see below for what it means)


   - note that the & reference operator is possible to use only on variables
     - thus this is invalid:

       p = &(i + 1);

  - store value to the address pointed to by the pointer:

    *p = 1;


## Changing pointers:

  - pointers can be moved forward and backward

   p += 1;
   p++;
   p--;

    - operator gotchas:

      - * has bigger precedence than + so:

      i = *p + 1;

      is equal to

      i = (*p) + 1;

      - postfix ++ has higher precedence than *:

        i = *p++;

	is evaluated as *(p++) but it still does the following because ++ is
	used in postfix mode, ie. the value of expression "p++" is p:

        i = *p; p++;

  - the pointer is moved by the amount of underlying (domain) data type
    when using arithmetics


Task: create pointer to int, print it, create new pointer that points to
      p + 1. See what is the difference between the 2 pointers.

Code: ptr-diff.c

