# Warm-up

Print a circle of a chosen radius.  Use a define for the radius so that you can
test other sizes.  This is for 12, for example:

```
$ ./a.out
            *
        **** ****
      **         **
     *             *
    *               *
   *                 *
  *                   *

 *                     *



*                       *



 *                     *

  *                   *
   *                 *
    *               *
     *             *
      **         **
        **** ****
            *
```

Hint: an equation for a circle is x^2 + y^2 = MYRAD^2, ie.

```
	y = sqrt(MYRAD * MYRAD - x * x);
```

You can find the `sqrt()` function declaration in `<math.h>`.

On Linux, you will need to link with the math library to get the `sqrt()`
function code, ie:

```
$ gcc -lm warm-up.c
```

An extension: fill the circle up.

```
$ ./a.out
            *
        *********
      *************
     ***************
    *****************
   *******************
  *********************
  *********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
*************************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
 ***********************
  *********************
  *********************
   *******************
    *****************
     ***************
      *************
        *********
            *
```

Solution: [warm-up.c](/src/warm-up.c)

# Pointer recap

A pointer is a variable that contains a memory address.  A pointer has a type,
ie. it points to an object of a specific type (could be `void` though, more on
that later).

When dereferencing a pointer (ie. using the `*` operator), we access the object
the pointer points to.

Pointers and integers are not interchangeable.  However, you can explicitly
convert a number to a pointer and vice versa if the pointer and integer are wide
enough.

C guarantees that zero is never a valid address for data.

```
int n = 13;
int *p = &n;
int i = *p;	// i will be 13
```

[ptr-recap.c](/src/ptr-recap.c)

# Pointer size

```
int *p;
```

`sizeof (p)` is an address size, in our case either 32 or 64 bits depending on
how your code was compiled.

# Arrays and pointers

In C, there is a strong relationship between arrays and pointers.

By definition, the value of a variable or expression of type array is the
address of element zero of the array.

```
pa = &a[0];	// [] is of higher precedence than &
pa = a;		// same result as above
```

Incrementing a pointer increments the value by the size of the object the
pointer points to.  Ie.

```
int a[] = { 0, 1, 2 };
int *p = a;

printf("%d\n", *(p + 2));	// will print 2
```

[ptr-inc.c](/src/ptr-inc.c)

## Arrays are not variables though

You cannot do the following:

```
int a[1];
int aa[1];
++a;		// error
a = aa;		// error
```

[arrays-are-not-vars.c](/src/arrays-are-not-vars.c)

# Strings and arrays

A string constant is an expression whose value is the address of the first
character of the string.  As a string is an array of characters, that matches
the fact that an array name represents the address of its first element.

[string-const-address.c](/src/string-const-address.c)

You can use an array notation with pointers.

And given that a string is a pointer to its first character, we can use it with
array notation.

```
char *p = "hello";

printf("%c\n", p[1]);	// will print 'e'
```

[array-notation-with-ptr.c](/src/array-notation-with-ptr.c)

And you can use a pointer notation with arrays (we already mentioned that the
array name is a synonym for the address of its first element).

```
char a[] = "hello, world";

printf("%c\n", *(a + 1));	// will print 'e'
```

[ptr-with-array-notation.c](/src/ptr-with-array-notation.c)

# Valid pointer operations

The valid pointer operations are:

- assignment of pointers of the same type
- adding or subtracting a pointer and an integer
- subtracting or comparing two pointers to members of the same array
- assigning or comparing to zero

All other pointer arithmetic is illegal.

More specifically, assigning an integer to a pointer is not a valid operation,
usually you get a warning.

```C
int *p = 0x1234;	// do not do that
```

# Calling by value vs calling by reference

In C, we always call by value.  To change a value of a parameter, and emulate a
calling by reference, you need to pass pointers.

```
int
swap(int a, int b)
{
	int n = a;

	a = b;
	b = n;
}
```

[swap-by-value.c](/src/swap-by-value.c)

Task: write swap() that actually swaps the values.

Solution: [swap-by-reference.c](/src/swap-by-reference.c)

When an array name is passed to a function, what is actually passed is the
address of the first element.  Even if you declare a function argument as an
array, **the argument is a pointer**.

[array-as-argument.c](/src/array-as-argument.c)

Note: some compilers notice that the `sizeof` operator is applied on array
passed into a function and produce a warning about it (clang with
`-Wsizeof-array-argument`).

```
$ clang -Wsizeof-array-argument array-as-argument.c
array-as-argument.c:15:25: warning: sizeof on array function parameter will
    return size of 'char *' instead of 'char [20]' [-Wsizeof-array-argument]
        printf("%zu\n", sizeof (a));
                               ^
array-as-argument.c:12:11: note: declared here
myfn(char a[20])
          ^
1 warning generated.
```

# Home assignment

Task: write a function that copies a string to a string array.  It returns
the number of characters copied.

Note that **a string constant is read-only by definition**, and writing to it is
undefined.  That is:

```
char *s = "hello"
// Do not do this.  Different compilers may act differently.
s[0] = 'H';
```

Take [implement-function.c](/src/implement-function.c) and implement the
function, see the comment inside.

Verify the code prints exactly what it says in the comments.  `gcc -Wall -Wextra
implement-function.c` **must** be clear of any warnings.

Solution: [implement-function-solution.c](/src/implement-function-solution.c)
