# Recap

- pointer is just a variable, stores an address of another object
- to get the value, use dereference operator
- sizeof() applied to pointer will get the size of its storage
- ptrs are handy for passing by reference
- NULL by definition unmapped
- array "name" is pointer to the 1st elem
  - not a variable => cannot be modified
- subscripting arrays vs. pointer arith `a[i] = *(a + i)`
- using the pointer variable is using its value, i.e. the address
- ptr dec/increment advances by the size of the underlying type
- addr operator `&` can only be used on variables
- pointers can be subtracted, not added (no sense)
- `void` pointer can be used to assign back and forth
- postfix has higher precedence than deref op however will be evaluated in the
  next sequence
- `errno` variable (of type `int`) signifies the last error of a syscall
  - on Unix see the `errno(3)` man page for possible error codes
  - handy `err()` family of functions (non in the C standard though)
- I/O ops done with file handle
  - fopen/fgets/fclose
  - watch out for resource leaks: [fopen-leak.c](src/fopen-leak.c)

# Pointer addressing

Like with arrays, it is possible to subscript pointers:

```C
        int a[10];
        int *p = a;

        p[0]...
```

since the same rule applies: `p[x]` is `*(p + x)`.

# Operator precedence

`*p++` is `*(p++)` as `++` is of higher priority than `*`.  However, the value of the expression
is still `*p` though as `p` is incremented after the expression is evaluated.

See the table on http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/operator_precedence

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Array of pointers

```C
/*
 * [] is of higher precedence than *, so the following means:
 *
 *	 "a is an array of 10 pointers to char"
 */
char *a[10];
```
You can initialize it the same way as before.  Remember, a string contant is
technically an array of chars, so we can use it to initialize this array of char
pointers (same as `char *p = a`, see lecture 07 notes).
```C
char *a[] = { "hello", "world", "!" };
```
Code: :eyes: [array-of-ptrs.c](src/array-of-ptrs.c)

:wrench: task: define two integers i, j and initialize them with some arbitrary
values.  define an array `a` of pointers to `int`s that will contain pointers
to these two integers.  define an array `b` of `int`s that will contain the values
of these two integers.  define a pointer `p`, and assign i-th element of array
`a` to it.  Define a pointer `q`, and assign an address of the i-th element of
array `b` to it.  Print the address of `p`, `q` and then deference them.

What you are expected to get when dereferencing the `p` and `q` pointers?

What is the distance between these 2 pointers?  Does it make sense to do that?

What is a reasonable value of the 1st argument (`i`)?

usage: `./a.out <i>`

Code: :eyes: [ptr-to-array-of-ptrs.c](src/ptr-to-array-of-ptrs.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Pointer to a pointer

We know that a pointer points to an object (unless its a `NULL` pointer or of
type `void`), eg. an `int`.  However, the object can be another address, i.e.
another pointer.

```C
int i = 13;
int *pi = &i;
int **ppi = &pi;	// ppi is a pointer to a pointer to an int

// *pi is a pointer to an int, so another dereference is needed to get the value
printf("%d\n", **pi);	// prints 13
```

## A pointer to a pointer to an array vs. a pointer to an array of pointers

Imagine this situation: let's assume we have an array of pointers to an integer.
A function takes a pointer to a pointer to an integer and dereferences the
array's n-th element, i.e.:

```C
void
foo(int **p, size_t idx)
{
	printf("%d\n", *(*p + idx));
}
```

Clearly, this works fine in a situation when `pp` is indeed a pointer to an
array of integer pointers (left).  Now what if someone passes a pointer to a
pointer to an integer (right)?

	  +----------+      +----------+
	i |    42    |    j |    7     |
	  +----------+      +----------+
	        ^            /
	        |          /
	   +----------+----------+		+----------+----------+
	 a |          |          |	      b |     42   |    7     |
	   +----------+----------+		+----------+----------+
	         ^				      ^
	         |				      |
	    +----------+			+----------+
	ppa |	       |		     pb |	   |
	    +----------+			+----------+
	  					      ^
						      |
						 +----------+
	  				     ppb |	    |
						 +----------+

What is the difference in accessing the values ? I.e. what will `**(x + 1)` and
`*(*x + 1)` do when `x` is `ppa` or `ppb` ?

Code: :eyes: [ptr-ptr-array.c](src/ptr-ptr-array.c)

This is from a real-life problem, quoting from https://unixpapa.com/incnote/pam.html:

> When the conversation function is called, it is passed an array of prompts.
> This is always passed in as struct pam_message `**mesg`. However, the
> interpretation varies. In Linux-PAM and OpenPAM this is a pointer to an array
> of pointers to pam_message structures, whereas in Solaris it is a pointer to a
> pointer to an array of pam_message structures. Frequently there is only one
> prompt being passed in, so it doesn't matter. Under either interpretation, the
> first structure is addressable as `**msg`. However, accessing subsequent
> elements is different. In Linux-PAM and OpenPAM, the second element is at
> `*(msg[2])`, while in Solaris it is at `(*msg)[2]`.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Changing pointers

  - in order to change the value of a pointer in a function, it has to be
    passed as a pointer to a pointer
    - this makes sense, because the storage address of a plain pointer is not
      known to the function

Code: :eyes: [ptr-change.c](src/ptr-change.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Program arguments

```C
int main(int argc, char *argv[]);
```
  - `argv` is declared as an array of pointers
    - i.e. `argv[i]` is a pointer to char
  - the arguments of `main()` can have arbitrary names however please stick
    to the convention to avoid confusion of those who might be reading your
    program

  - `argc` is a number of command line arguments, including the command name
    itself (in `argv[0]`).

  - `argv[i]` are arguments as strings.  Note, they are **strings** even if you put
    numbers there on the command line.

  - `argv[argc]` is NULL by definition.

Note: remember (see lecture 07 notes) that in a function argument, an array is
      always treated as a pointer so the above effectively becomes:
```C
        int main(int argc, char **argv);
```
  i.e. in this context, char `*argv[]` and char `**argv` are the same.

  The declaration merely hints at the memory layout.

Also, you already know that you can use an array notation with characters as
well, so you could use `argv[i][j]` to print individual characters.  Just make
sure that it's not out of range.

Code: :eyes: [argv-as-2d-array.c](src/argv-as-2d-array.c)


- the memory for `argc`, `argv` is allocated before `main()` is called
  - the standard (C99) leaves unspecified where argc/argv are stored

    > section 5.1.2.2.1: the strings pointed to by the argv array shall be
    modifiable by the program, and retain their last-stored values between
    program startup and program termination.

- the `argv` is array of pointers to null-terminated strings and must be
  terminated by a `NULL` pointer. (quote from the execve(2) man page)

```
  argv
  +-----------+
  |           |---------->+--------------+
  +-----------+           |              |---->+---+---+---+---+----+
                          +--------------+     | p | r | o | g | \0 |
                          |              |-\   +---+---+---+---+----+
  argc                    +--------------+  \
  +----------+            |              |-  \->+---+---+---+----+
  |    3     |            +--------------+ \    | f | o | o | \0 |
  +----------+            |     NULL     |  \   +---+---+---+----+
                          +--------------+   \
                                              ->+---+---+---+----+
                                                | b | a | r | \0 |
						+---+---+---+----+
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:wrench: Task: find a distance between the first occurence of character `<a>` and `<b>` in a
string `<string>`.  If either of the character is not found in the string, print
an error.
```
./a.out a x "ahello xworld"
7
```
Note: do not use `strchr()` or the like.

Code: :eyes: [argv-char-dist.c](src/argv-char-dist.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:wrench: Task:

  - print all command line arguments using `argc`
  - print all command line arguments using just `argv`
  - print all command line arguments not starting with `-`
  - print all command line arguments using a recursive function (that accepts pointer to pointer to char)

Note: for all arguments print their address as well
Note: do not print the terminating `NULL` entry
      - some `printf()` implementations barf on NULL pointer when printing
        via the `%s` format string

Code: :eyes: [argv-while.c](src/argv-while.c), [argv-for.c](src/argv-for.c), [argv-nodash.c](src/argv-nodash.c), [print-argv-recursively.c](src/print-argv-recursively.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:wrench: Task: print the n-th character of the r-rd argument (count from 0), do not
count `argv[0..2]`.  If not enough arguments or the argument is not long enough,
print a helpful message.  Only use pointers, do NOT use square brackets (ie.
`argv[i][j]` is NOT allowed).
```
./a.out 2 3 hey hi world
l
```
Note: use atoi() to convert the first 2 arguments to integers

Code: :eyes: [argv-nr.c](src/argv-nr.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- usage: semi-formal specification of program arguments
  - usually used to print when invalid option or arguments are specified
  - can be handled via errx()
  - the usage usually contains program name followed by the argument schema
    - see e.g. the nc(1) man page
  - optional arguments are enclosed in square brackets, mandatory arguments
    are enclosed in `<>` or left without brackets

Task: write a program that takes 1 or 2 arguments, if run with any other count,
      print usage and exit.

Code: :eyes: [usage.c](src/usage.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# heap/dynamic allocation: malloc()/free()

The memory automatically allocated for local variables and function parameters
is allocated in an area called a stack. There is an area called a heap to
allocate memory that lasts after the function returns. This is also called
dynamic allocation.

The allocator in the standard library offers the malloc()/calloc()/free()/...
APIs for heap allocation.

The malloc/calloc functions return a pointer to a memory area of a specified
size or NULL pointer if the allocation failed - always check that!  (even on
Linux where it seems it can never fail - to be prepared for change in a
configuration and also for portability to systems with more conservative memory
allocation)

## Memory leaks

C runtime does not have garbage collector so all heap allocated memory has
to be explicitly freed via `free()` after it is no longer needed otherwise this would create
resource leak called memory leak. Depending on the problem this might cause the problem
to run out of memory later on (and then malloc/calloc can start returning NULL).

The leaks can be checked using static or dynamic analyzers.

Task: write a program that takes all arguments that follow `argv[0]`, concatenates
      them (without the terminating null) into one (dynamically allocated via
      malloc()) string and prints this string to the standard output.
      - the concatenation can be done either by hand (try that first)
        or strncat() (try that afterwards)

Code: :eyes: [argv-concat.c](src/argv-concat.c)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:wrench: Task: what do these programs do when run with 2 arguments (that are sufficiently long enough):
```C
      int
      main(int argc, char **argv)
      {
              printf("%s\n", ++*++argv);
      }

      int
      main(int argc, char **argv)
      {
              printf("%s\n", ++*++argv);
              printf("%s\n", ++*++argv);
      }

      int
      main(int argc, char **argv)
      {
              printf("%s\n", *++*++argv);
      }
```
Note: the last function might not compile with smarter compilers (such as LLVM)
      that include format string checks.

Code: :eyes: [plus-plus-argv-1.c](src/plus-plus-argv-1.c), [plus-plus-argv.c](src/plus-plus-argv.c)

