#
# Lecture 09, Apr 18
#
# Jan P.
#

Warm-up: assignment.txt

I recommend finishing up all the assignments at home, especially the one with
dynamically allocating an array of strings.

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2D array initialization

Static array initialization is just an extension of 1D array initialization.
You initialize by rows.

        int a[MYSIZE][MYSIZE] = {
                {  0,  1,  2,  3 },
                {  4,  5,  6,  7 },
                {  8,  9, 10, 11 },
                { 12, 13, 14, 15 }
        };

code: 2d-static-array-initialization.c

C stores the array in a single piece of memory, consequtively, row after row.
That means that all but the last dimension must be known.  So you could do:

	int a[][3] = {
                {  0,  1,  2 },
                {  4,  5,  6 },
                {  8 },		// a[2][1], a[2][2] implicitly initialized to 0
                { 12, 13, 14 }
	}

However, you cannot do:

	int a[][] = {
                {  0,  1,  2 },
                {  4,  5,  6 },
                {  8,  9, 10 },
                { 12, 13, 14 }
	}

xxx.c:12:7: error: array has incomplete element type 'int []'
        int a[][] = {
	     ^

Remember that we do not have to set all elements of the row when initializing an
array so that is why the C language does not guess the length of the row:

	int a[10] = { 1, 2 }; // from a[2] to a[9], elements are 0

Neither you can do the following (same compiler error).  As the compiler stores
the array data in rows, if it does not know how long is the row, it cannot
proceed.

	int a[4][] = {
                {  0,  1,  2 },
                {  4,  5,  6 },
                {  8,  9, 10 },
                { 12, 13, 14 }
	}

You already know that you can initialize a character array using strings instead
of "{ 'a', 'b', ... }":

  char s[] = "hello, world";

  Same way you can initialize an array of strings:

  char *s[] = {
	  "hello",
	  "hi",
	  "good day",
	  "what's up"
  };

  However, while string is technically an array of characters, it's an
  expression whose value is the address of the 1st element of the array, ie. the
  1st char.  { 'a', 'b', ... } is an initializer for a static array.  So, the
  following will not compile:

  char *s[] = {
	  { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0' },
	  { 'h', 'i', '\0' }
  };

Also note that the following two lines mean something very different:

  char a[] = "hello, world";
  char *p = "hello, world";

  In the first case, the string is only used to initialize the array.
  You cannot assign anything to "a" after that but you can change its
  array elements.

  In the second case, a static string is created and stored in the
  binary (ie. the program file), and "p" contains its address, ie. an address of
  the first character.  One can change the "p" variable to point to something
  else but it's undefined what happens when one tries to change the characters
  of the string.  With gcc, all such strings are read only:

	janp:air::~$ cat main.c
	#include <sys/types.h>

	int
	main(void)
	{
		char *p = "hello, world";

		*p = 'H';
		return (0);
	}
	janp:air::~$ gcc main.c
	janp:air::~$ ./a.out
	Bus error: 10

  Wikipedia: In computing, a bus error is a fault raised by hardware,
  notifying an operating system (OS) that a process is trying to access
  memory that the CPU cannot physically address: an invalid address for
  the address bus, hence the name.

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Type casting

We already saw an implicit conversion when working with integer types.

Casting is an explicit type conversion:

    (type_name)expression

    eg. "int i = 13; long l = (long)i;"  // casting not needed in this case

Casting is used to avoid compiler warnings as a sort of a hint to the compiler
that you know what you are doing.

Code: cast-double.c

Explicit cast for pointers of different types works:

    A pointer to an object type may be converted to a pointer to a different
    object type.  If the resulting pointer is not correctly aligned for the
    referenced type, the behavior is undefined.  Otherwise, when converted back
    again, the result shall compare equal to the original pointer.

    (C2011, 6.3.2.3/7)

  - this will be esp. handy for pointers to structures

  - the cast itself is not a problem, it depends on what will be done with the
    result

Code: ptr-cast.c

"void *" is a special pointer that cannot be dereferenced.  You can always
assign any pointer to a (void *) pointer without any need for casting, and you
can also assign any (void *) pointer to any other pointer without any need for
casting.  These assignments are guaranteed to not lose any information.

int i = 99;
void *p = &i;
int *pi = p;

printf("%d\n", *pi);	// will print 99
printf("%d\n", *p);	// will error out when compiled

Code: cast-intptr.c

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Verify that a staticly allocated 2D array is stored in one piece of memory, row
by row.  Hint: you need to recast a 2D array to a 1D array, then print it as a
single row.

int a[5][5] = { ... };
int *a = (int *)a;
...

code: 2d-static-array-as-1d.c
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Storage classes

- two classes - automatic and static
- declaration within a block creates an automatic object
- the storage class determines the lifetime of the storage associated with the
  identified object
- only one storage class specifier may be given in a declaration
- objects declared outside of a block is always of the static storage class (eg.
  global variables).
- static objects retain their value upon reentry to functions and blocks.
- you can initialize a static object.  The initialization happens just once.

code: fn-static-object.c

/* This one also shows how to use goto.  More on that later. */
code: block-static-object.c

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Internal vs external linkage

Static objects with the keyword "static" are of internal linkage, meaning they
are not seen from other compilation units).  Static objects without the keyword
"static" are external.

Use "extern" keyword for objects that are defined in a different compilation
unit.

Example:

	$ cc linkage.c ext.c
	Undefined symbols for architecture x86_64:
	  "_si", referenced from:
	      _main in linkage-917564.o
	ld: symbol(s) not found for architecture x86_64
	clang: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see
	invocation)

Also note that each object must have exactly one definition.  For objects with
internal linkage, this rule applies separately to each translation unit, because
internally-linked objects are unique to a translation unit.
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Function pointers.

A function name is a pointer to the function.  You can pass it as an argument.

int
myadd(int a, int b)
{
	return (a + b);
}

int
process_numbers(int a, int b, int (*f)(int, int))
{
	return ((*f)(a, b));
}

Code: fn-ptr.c
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Home task

Use qsort(3) function to sort argv, and print it sorted then.  Check the man
page, you will need to write a function that can compare two elements of the
array you provide to the qsort() function.

First use strcmp() to sort the argument alphabetically, then use atoi() to sort
them numerically.

After that, come up with another way of sorting the arguments and write a
function for it as well.

Code: argv-sort.c (for alphabetical sorting only)

vim:ft=conf
