# Warm-up
## Working with dereference operator

```
./a.out dragon firefly jupiter
```

- Using the pointer arithmetics and the dereference operator `*` only, given
  the exact command line above, print 'g' from the first argument, 'r' from the
  2nd, and 't' from the last one.
- That is, you must not use brackets `[]` at all.
- You can assume the command will have the arguments above, i.e. it's OK to
  crash if you run it without any arguments, for example.
- It is still good to verify you have at least 3 arguments.
- Remember
[program arguments](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/program-arguments.md)


# Operator precedence

There are 15 levels of operator precedence,
see the table at http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/operator_precedence

## Associativity

If there are multiple operators with the same precedence in an expression,
the evaluation is decided based on their associativity.

For example:
```C
8 / 2 % 3
```
has 2 operators with precedence level of 3 that have left-to-right
associativity. Therefore, they will be evaluated as
```C
(8 / 2) % 3
```
## Examples

`*p++` is `*(p++)` as suffix `++` is of higher priority than `*`.  However, the
value of the expression is still `*p` though as the dereference operator is
applied on `p` since that is the value of `p++`.

Note that suffix `++` and `--` has higher priority than prefix `++` and `--`,
and also has different associativity.

:wrench: Task: determine the outcome of these expressions/declarations:
  - `*p++`
  - `++*p`
  - `int *p[2]`
  - `int (*p)[3]`

:eyes: [pointer-to-array-type-difference.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/pointer-to-array-type-difference.c)
shows why the array size is significant in the last example.

## Operand evaluation order

Consider the following:

```C
int foo(void);
int bar(void);

int x = foo() + bar();
```

Note that the order of evaluation of subexpressions is an unspecified behavior
(see C99 6.5, paragraph 3).  So, `foo()` can be called before or after `bar()`.
If we add another function:

```C
int foo(void);
int bar(void);
int another(void);

int x = foo() + bar() + another();
```

then the expression will become `(foo() + bar()) + another()` however the order
in which `foo()` and `bar()` will be called is still not specified.  Remember -
*unspecified* means the implementation (= compiler) is free to choose which
argument will be processes first and generally should not document the decision.
More on that in
:#module types-of-behavior.md types of behavior.

## Common gotchas

### `==` or `!=` versus `=`

the condition in the statement:
```C
if ((c = getchar()) != 0)
    ...
```

needs to be bracketed this way because `==` and `!=` is of higher precedence
than `=`.

### `&` or `*` versus `->` or `.`

`->` and `.` (structure member access) have higher precedence than `&` (address
of) and `*` (dereference).  So, `*somestruct->p_member` dereferences the pointer
`p_member`.

# :wrench: Operator precedence and structures

Consider the following structures:

```C
struct bar {
	int val;
} bar;

struct {
	int a[42];
	char *b;
	struct bar *c;
} foo;
```

Write code to initialize the members of `foo` with `1, 2, 3`, `"BBB"` and
address of `bar`, respectively and `val` in `bar` with `42`.  Use designated
initializers.

Write expressions to get:

  - The address of `a`
  - The address of `b`
  - The address of the second element of `a`
  - The address of the 3rd character from string `b`
  - The 3rd character from string `b`
  - Value of `val` in `bar` using `foo`
  - Address of `val` in `bar` using `foo`

Use as few brackets as possible.

:key: [struct-op-precedence.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-op-precedence.c)


# Pointer addressing

We already know that as with arrays, it is possible to use the array subscript
operator `[]` on pointers, too:

```C
int a[10];
int *p = a;

p[0] = ...
```

That goes directly from the standard:

>`p[x]` is equivalent to `*(p + x)`.

Remember that incrementing a pointer or an array expression goes by increments
of the element type size.

```C
int a[2] = { 1, 222 };

/* Will print 222. */
printf("%d\n", *(a + 1));
```

# Array of pointers

Remember what we know about
[program arguments.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/program-arguments.md)

```C
/*
 * [] is of higher precedence than *, so the following means:
 *
 *	 "a is an array of 10 pointers to char"
 */
char *a[10];
```

You could write it as `char *(a[10])` but that would be quite uncommon and is
not recommended.

You can initialize such an array the same way as before.  Remember, a string
literal is internally an array of `char`s, so we can use it to initialize the
following array of `char` pointers (it is the same as if we did `char *p = a`).

```C
char *a[] = { "hello", "world", "!" };
```

Modifying such strings is an undefined operation as they are read-only by the
specification.  Code doing so and compiled by GCC or Clang will crash.

:eyes: [array-of-ptrs.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-of-ptrs.c)

# Pointer to a pointer

We know that a pointer points to an object (unless its a null pointer or of type
`void`), e.g. an `int`.  However, the object may be another address, i.e.  a
pointer may point to another pointer.

```C
int i = 13;
int *pi = &i;
int **ppi = &pi;        // ppi is a pointer to a pointer to an int

// *pi is a pointer to an int, so another dereference is needed to get the value
printf("%d\n", **ppi);   // prints 13
```

You could write `*(*ppi)` but the associativity here is obvious and using
parentheses would be very unusual here.

## A pointer to a pointer to an array vs. a pointer to an array of pointers

Imagine this: let's assume we have an array of pointers to an `int`, as follows:

```C
int *p[10];     // note it is equivalent to "int *(p[10])"
```

Now, let's have a function that takes an array of `int` pointers and prints the
value pointed to by array's n-th element.  We know that when passing an array
as an argument, C converts it to a pointer.
So, `int *p[]` can be passed as an argument to an `int **p` parameter.

```C
void
foo(int **p, size_t idx)
{
        printf("%d\n", **(p + idx));
}
```

We can legally pass in any pointer to a pointer to an `int`.  Clearly, that
works fine in a situation when the object being passed in is indeed a pointer to
an array of `int` pointers.  Now what if someone passes in a pointer to a
pointer to an `int` array?

Note that in both situations, `ppa` and `ppb` **properly fit the declaration**
`int **p`.  **The difference is in semantics - is the actual array in the first
or the second indirection?** And that is a piece of information that must be
provided upfront by whoever wrote the function accepting such an argument.

```
    +-------+     +-------+     +-------+
 i  |   42  |   j |   7   |   k |   99  |
    +-------+     +-------+     +-------+
        ^           /      _______/
        |         /       /
    +-------+-------+-------+           +------+------+------+
 a  |   &i  |   &j  |   &k  |         b |  42  |   7  |  99  |
    +-------+-------+-------+           +------+------+------+
        ^                                   ^
        |                                   |
    +-------+                           +------+.......
ppa |   a   |                        pb |   b  |   ?  :
    +-------+                           +------+.......
                                           ^
                                           |
                                        +------+
                                    ppb |  pb  |
                                        +------+
```

- What is the difference in accessing the values?  I.e. what will `**(x + 1)`
  and `*(*x + 1)` do when `x` is `ppa` or `ppb`?
- Semantically, we could also pass in a pointer to an array of pointers to
  arrays of `int`s, which would have arrays on both levels in the above ASCII
  chart, and would still match the `int **p` declaration.
- The following source code closely follows the ASCII art schema above.  Please
  study the code and make sure you understand the output completely.  Which
  address from the program output corresponds to the value of `?` above?

:eyes: [ptr-ptr-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-ptr-array.c)

Example output: 

```
$ ./a.out
 &i = 0x7ffee68b1880 (42)
 &j = 0x7ffee68b187c (7)
 &k = 0x7ffee68b1878 (99)
  a = 0x7ffee68b1890
  b = 0x7ffee68b1884
 pb = 0x7ffee68b1884 [*pb = 42]
ppb = 0x7ffee68b1868 [*ppb = 0x7ffee68b1884]
first:
0x7ffee68b1880 = 42
0x7ffee68b1884 = 42
second:
0x7ffee68b187c -> 7 (in hex 0x7)
0x7ffee68b1890 -> -427091840 (in hex 0xe68b1880)
```

The situation above is taken from a real-life problem.  Quoting from
https://unixpapa.com/incnote/pam.html:

> When the conversation function is called, it is passed an array of prompts.
> This is always passed in as struct pam\_message `**mesg`. However, the
> interpretation varies. In Linux-PAM and OpenPAM this is a pointer to an array
> of pointers to pam\_message structures, whereas in Solaris it is a pointer to a
> pointer to an array of pam\_message structures. Frequently there is only one
> prompt being passed in, so it doesn't matter. Under either interpretation, the
> first structure is addressable as `**msg`. However, accessing subsequent
> elements is different. In Linux-PAM and OpenPAM, the second element is at
> `*(msg[2])`, while in Solaris it is at `(*msg)[2]`.

The situation when one prompt is passed only is similar to what happens when the
function `first`() in
:eyes: [ptr-ptr-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-ptr-array.c)
is called for `ppa` and `ppb`: we see `42` in both cases (element `[0][0]`).
The problem manifests itself when we have and need to reference more than one
number (or more than one, as in the PAM situation above, `msg` structures).

# Changing pointers

- In order to change the value of a pointer in a function, it has to be passed
  as a pointer to a pointer.
	- This makes sense, because the storage address of a plain pointer is
	  not known to the function, and therefore we must pass in its address
	  so that we can change the object the address points to by
	  dereferencing the address.

:eyes: [ptr-change.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-change.c)


# Explicit type conversion

We already saw an implicit conversion when working with integer types, see the
[module on conversions](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/arithmetic-type-conversions.md)
which also mentions the 6.3 spec section with all the details.

Casting is an explicit type conversion:

```C
(type_name)expression;

int i = 13;
long l = (long)i;		// Just an example.  The casting not needed in this
				// case, the implicit integer conversion would
				// work fine.
```

Casting is used to avoid compiler warnings as a sort of a hint to the compiler
that you know what you are doing.

:eyes: [cast-double.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/cast-double.c)

Explicit cast for pointers of different types works:

(C99, 6.3.2.3, 7)

> A pointer to an object or incomplete type may be converted to a pointer to a
> different object or incomplete type.  If the resulting pointer is not
> correctly aligned for the pointed-to type, the behavior is undefined.
> Otherwise, when converted back again, the result shall compare equal to the
> original pointer.

This will be especially handy for pointers to structures.  See
[structure casting](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/structure-casting.md)
for more information.

You can always cast explicitly but it depends on what will be done with the
result.  For example, on some architectures, you cannot access improperly
unaligned objects.  The following example is from a SPARC machine.

```
$ isainfo
sparcv9 sparc

$ cat main.c
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
        char *s = "hello, world, hello, world";
        long long int *p = (long long int *)(s + 1);

        printf("%lld\n", *p);
}

$ gcc main.c
$ ./a.out
Bus Error (core dumped)
```

:eyes: [bus-error.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bus-error.c)

Now see the following code and figure out what is going to happen.
:wrench: :eyes: [ptr-cast.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-cast.c)

Note that `void *` is a special pointer that cannot be dereferenced.  You can
always assign any pointer to a `(void *)` pointer without any need for casting,
and you can also assign any `(void *)` pointer to any other pointer without any
need for casting.  These assignments are **guaranteed to not lose any
information**.

```C
int i = 99;
void *p = &i;
int *pi = p;

printf("%d\n", *pi);	// will print 99
printf("%d\n", *p);	// dereferencing (void *), will error out when compiled
```

:wrench: Verify that a staticly allocated 2D array is stored in one piece of
memory, row by row.

Hint: you need to recast a 2D array to a 1D array, then print it as a
single row.  There are a few different ways to do it.  Do not look at the
solution until you write your own code.

```C
int a[5][5] = { ... };
// ...
```

:key: [2d-static-array-as-1d.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/2d-static-array-as-1d.c)


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## Work with arrays and pointers

- Define two integers `i`, `j` and initialize them with some arbitrary values.
- Define an array `a` of pointers to `int` that contains pointers to these two
  integers.
- Define an array `b` of `int`s that will contain the values of these two
  integers.
- Define a pointer `p`, and assign i-th element of array `a` to it.
- Define a pointer `q`, and assign an address of the i-th element of array `b`
  to it.
- Print the address of `p`, `q` and then deference them.

What you are expected to get when dereferencing the `p` and `q` pointers?

What is the distance between these 2 pointers?  Does it make sense to do that?
A difference between two pointers is a signed integer of type `ptrdiff_t`.  To
print it out via `printf`, use a `t` modifier.

```C
int a[2];
int *p = &a[1];
int *q = &a[0];

printf("%td\n", p - q);
```

Usage: `./a.out <i>`

What is a reasonable value of the 1st argument (`i`) of the program ?

:eyes: [ptr-to-array-of-ptrs.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-to-array-of-ptrs.c)

