# Warm-up
# :wrench: `strsepc`

Implement:

```C
char *strsepc(char **stringp, int c);
```

which behaves like strsep(3) except that it searches only for the first
occurence of a single character.

Try to use `strsep`() first

:eyes: [strsep.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/strsep.c)

:key: [strsepc.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/strsepc.c)


# heap/dynamic allocation: malloc()/free()

The memory automatically allocated for local variables and function parameters
is allocated in an area called a *stack*. There is an area called a *heap* to
allocate memory that lasts after the function returns. That is also called
a *dynamic allocation*.

The allocator in the standard C library offers the
`malloc`()/`calloc`()/`free`()/...  APIs for heap allocation.

:heavy\_exclamation\_mark: The `malloc`/`calloc` functions return a pointer to a
memory area of a specified size or a null pointer if the allocation failed -
always check that!  (even on Linux where it seems it can never fail - to be
prepared for change in a configuration and also for portability to systems with
more conservative memory allocation).

```C
#define	NUM_ELEMS	20
int *p;

if ((p = malloc(NUM_ELEMS * sizeof (int))) == NULL)
	err(1, "malloc");
p[0] = 99;
p[NUM_ELEMS - 1] = 77;
```

The prototype for `malloc` is as follows:

```C
void *malloc(size_t size);
```

Note that as `malloc` returns `void *`, there is no need to explicitly type its
result when assigned to a pointer, see
[Explicit type conversion.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/explicit-type-conversion.md)
That is, do not use:

```C
int *p;

p = (int *)malloc(16);	// unnecessary cast
```

See `man malloc` for more memory allocation related functions.

The C runtime does not have a garbage collector so all heap allocated memory
has to be explicitly freed via `free`() after it is no longer needed.

:wrench: write a program that takes at least 2 arguments.  First argument
specifies a dimension of an array of `int`s, the rest are the `int`s to fill
out the array.  To allocate memory for the array, use `malloc`.  When filling
out the array, ignore extra arguments.  If you have less arguments, use zero
for the remaining array elements.  At the end, print out the array.  To convert
a string to an integer, use `atoi` and assume numbers are correctly entered.

```
./a.out 10 1 2 3 7 8 999 7 7 7 9 9 9 10 11
1 2 3 7 8 999 7 7 7 9 
```

:key: [allocate-and-fill-out-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/allocate-and-fill-out-array.c)

# Dynamic allocation induced problems

## Correctness

- use after free: read/write memory that is part of memory chunk that was free'd
  - *dangling pointer* is often the cause of this; e.g. a structure contains pointer
    to heap allocated memory which is freed at some point of time and the
    pointer is still used to access the memory afterwards. In the meantime some other part
    of the program could have allocated piece(s) of the free'd memory.
- double free: free already free'd buffer
  - can corrupt internal heap allocator structures if it does not
    track the state of memory chunks

## Memory leaks

If memory allocated on the heap is not freed, it creates a resource leak called
a *memory leak* as the allocator deems such memory used even that your code no
longer uses it.

Depending on its size(s) this might cause a problem of running out of memory
later on, and then `malloc`/`calloc` can start returning a null pointer as an
indication of allocation failure(s).

The leaks can be checked using static or dynamic analyzers.

:wrench: Write a program that takes all arguments that follow `argv[0]`,
concatenates them (without the terminating `NUL` character) into one string
dynamically allocated via `malloc`() and prints this string to the standard
output.

The concatenation can be done either by hand (try that first) or
using `strncat()` (try that afterwards).

:eyes: [argv-concat.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-concat.c)

You can then put the string processing in a loop and comment out the `free`()
call on the allocated memory.  Then check with `top -s 1` on Linux, macOS, or
any other Unix-like system (or use any other suitable system monitoring tool)
that the memory size of the running program quickly increases.

:eyes: [argv-concat-nofree.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-concat-nofree.c)


# Pointer to a structure and type casting

Pointers to structures are often used to achieve common interface for different
types that all need to be passed as arugments to a function.  Consider this:

```C
struct common { int type; };
struct A      { int type; char data[8]; };	// type == 1
struct B      { int type; char data[16]; };	// type == 2
```

We have a `common` structure with the only structure member present in all
structures, `type`.  A function can be then declared as follows:

```C
int func(struct common *c);
```

However, the function needs to process additional members for structures `A`,
`B`, etc.  So, internally it may cast the argument to the specific structure
based on their common structure member, `type`:

```C
if (c->type == 1) {
	struct A *ap = (struct A *)c;
	ap->data[7] = 'A';
} else if (c->type == 2) {
	struct B *bp = (struct B *)c;
	ap->data[15] = 'B';
}
```

And the `func` is used like this, i.e. the non-`common` argument is always
casted to the `common` structure so that the compiler knows we know what we are
doing:

```C
struct A a;

if (func((struct common *)&a) == -1) {
	...
```

This is possible since all the structures have the same member on the same
offset (that is offset 0).  However, note that you need to cast properly to
avoid warnings.  See the code below.

:eyes: [struct-common.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-common.c)

A function may also allocate an `A` or `B` structure and return its address as a
pointer to the `common` struct.  This pointer then needs to be casted in the
caller according to its first member.

See `struct sockaddr`, `struct sockaddr_in` and `struct sockaddr_in6`
definitions as an example on how this is done in practice.


# :wrench: Linked list

Declare a structure that forms a simple linked list and holds an integer as a
value.  The program is executed with a single argument specifying how many items
the list will have.

Allocate a new structure and insert values into the head (global variable).
Each new list item will have its value incremented by one.

Aside from the value itself, each node needs to hold a pointer to the next
structure in the list.  The last node has the next pointer set as `NULL`.

Once the list is completed, print its value by traversing its items from the
head to its end.

```
$ ./a.out
a.out: usage: ./a.out <num>
$ ./a.out 10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
```

:key: [linked-list-free.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linked-list-free.c)

## :wrench: Binary tree from binary representation

Write a program that creates a binary tree with N + 1 nodes, where N
is specified as a command line argument.

Each node, besides the root (that is always created), will contain an
integer and will be created like this: take a binary representation of the
number in the sequence {0, 1, ..., N - 1} and traverse the pre-existing tree
using this representation until a `NULL` node pointer is found.  0 means the
left child, 1 means the right one.

For example, for 5 (101 in binary), the tree will be created as follows:

  1. create root node
  1. create right node, descend
  1. create left node, descend
  1. create right node, descend, put the number in

Once the tree is populated, traverse the tree (choose your method), count the
nodes and print the number to the standard output.

Variant: add a function pointer to each node that will be called on its visit.
The number stored in the node will be the sole argument of this function.i  Use
that to traverse the tree and free the memory in the process.


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

# Command line option parsing

Implement a command line parser working the same as `getopt`(3).  The global
variable `myoptarg` will be set if an option has an argument to mimic the
`optarg` set by `getopt`().  Choose a useful subset of what `getopt` offers.

Note: call the function `mygetopt()` not to intermingle with the standard
library's `getopt()`.  Implement the "POSIXly correct solution", i.e. stop once
non-option argument is encountered (i.e. one not starting with `-`) or after the
`--` option is reached.

:wrench: Bonus task: implement `myoptind`/`myopterr`/`myoptopt` variables

See the following code on how to use `getopt`(3):

https://github.com/devnull-cz/unix-linux-prog-in-c-src/blob/master/getopt/getopt.c

## Create and traverse path tree

In memory, build a tree of paths, where each node is a path element. The tree
starts with root '/', the non-leaf nodes are directories, the leaves are files.
The three can look e.g. like this:

```
	 "/"
       /  |   \
      /   |     \
  "foo/" "f.txt"  "bar/"
  /   \
"a.c" "b.c"
```

Populate the tree with given paths and print the leaves (no particular order),
one per line.  Then free the allocated memory.

Each node can have constant number of children.

Possible input:
```C
	char *paths[] = { "/beverages/coffee/espresso.java",
			"/beverages/alcohol/beer.c",
			"/food/healthy/vegetarian/salad.txt",
			"/food/healthy/fruit/blueberries.hs",
			"/food/unhealthy/cake.md" };
```

:key: [dirtree.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/dirtree.c)

bonus tasks:
  - print also non-leaf nodes via depth first, with each node indented based on
    its tree depth.  E.g:

```
    $ ./a.out
    /
    	foo/
		a.c
		b.c
	f.txt
	bar/
```

  - remove the limitation for the constant number of children
  - print full paths of all files in the tree (hint: backpointers)

