# Warm-up
## Binary tree

- Define a structure for a binary tree using the `structure node_s` name.
- Each node of the tree can store either an `int` or a string (`char[]` of
  some fixed size).
- There is a member `t` of an `int` type.  That determines the data type stored
  in the node, e.g. `0` for `int`, `1` for `char[]`.
- Build a tree using a bunch of nodes (can be totally unbalanced).
	- Can be statically initialized using local variables (or generated
	  randomly however this will probably take more time to do and might
	  require allocation on the heap).
- Implement a function to perform the depth-first traversal that accepts a
  pointer to its root node and prints all data stored in the tree represented
  by the node based on the type of data in each node.


# Unions

- Unions resemble structures but they have a different semantics.
	- Unions store its members in the same memory location.
	- This allows for different "views" of the same data.
- They are usually combined with structures.
- Handy for efficient data storage or HW programming.

Consider this declaration:

```C
union foo {
	unsigned short i; // 2 bytes
	struct {
		unsigned char low;
		unsigned char high;
	} bytes;
};
```

- The `sizeof(union foo)` will be that of its largest member.
- Modify a value of `i` and it will be reflected in the low/high values because
  `i` and `bytes` share the same location

```
		0             high memory addresses
		+-------------+
		|      i      |
		+-------------+
		| low  | high |
                +-------------+
```

- Union can be part of a structure, :eyes: [union-in-struct.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-in-struct.c)
  and vice versa :eyes: [struct-in-union.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-in-union.c)
- Union can be "anonymous" (e.g. no name inside of a structure), however this is
  non-standard just like for structures.

:wrench: Use the above declaration to find out if the program is running on a
big or little endian system (least significant byte is stored on lowest
address).  The program will print either "big endian" or "little endian" to the
standard output.

:key: [union-lowhigh.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-lowhigh.c)

:wrench: Take the binary tree implementation and convert it to use a union to
store the data.

# Storage classes

- There are two storage classes - *automatic* and *static*.
- The storage class determines the lifetime of the storage associated with the
  identified object.
- Declaration within a block creates an automatic object.  Its storage is valid
  only within the very same block.
- Only one storage class specifier may be given in a declaration.
- Objects declared outside of any block are always of the static storage class
  (e.g. global variables).
- Static local objects (e.g. `static int i;`) retain their value upon reentry to
  functions and blocks.
- You can initialize a static object.  The initialization happens just once.

:eyes: [fn-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-static-object.c)

This source code example also shows how to use a `goto` statement.  More on that
later.

:eyes: [block-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/block-static-object.c)

Local variables are implicitly automatic but you could use the `auto` keyword
(noone does that though):

```C
int
main(void)
{
	auto int i;
}
```

You can also verify that as mentioned above, global variables may be only in the
static storage class:

```C
$ cat main.c
auto int j;

int main(void)
{
}
```

```
$ cc main.c
main.c:1:10: error: illegal storage class on file-scoped variable
auto int j;
         ^
1 error generated.
```

# Static variables and functions

If a function is declared `static`, it is visible only from the same source code
file.

Static variables: they retain value across function calls.  That is, the
initialization of a static variable within a function is done only once.

Yes, the word `static` is overloaded in C.

:wrench: Take the binary tree implementation and use the `static` keyword where
it makes sense.

# Internal vs external linkage for objects

Static objects with the keyword `static` are of internal *linkage*, meaning they
are not visible from other compilation units.  Static objects without the
keyword `static` are implicitly of external linkage.

Note that global variables in always in the static storage class, and the
following global variable is visible only from within the file where it is
defined because of the `static` keyword:

```C
static int x_global;

int
main(void)
{
	// ...
}
```

As we mentioned before, `static` is really an overloaded word/keyword in C and
may lead to confusion.

However, the following global variable (of the static storage class) is of
external linkage, meaning it is visible from other compilation modules (=
files).

```C
int x_global;

int
main(void)
{
	// ...
}
```

Use the `extern` keyword to declare objects that are defined in a different
compilation unit (= file).

Example:

```
$ cc linkage.c ext.c
Undefined symbols for architecture x86_64:
  "_si", referenced from:
      _main in linkage-917564.o
ld: symbol(s) not found for architecture x86_64
clang: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see invocation)
```

:eyes: [linkage.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linkage.c)

:eyes: [ext.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ext.c)

Also note that each object must have exactly one definition.  For objects with
internal linkage, this rule applies separately to each translation unit, because
internally-linked objects are unique to a translation unit.

# Function pointers

A function name is a pointer to the function.  You can pass it as an argument.

```C
int
myadd(int a, int b)
{
	return (a + b);
}

int
process_numbers(int a, int b, int (*f)(int, int))
{
	return ((*f)(a, b));
}

(void)process_numbers(7, 13, myadd));
```

:eyes: [fn-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-ptr.c)

:wrench: Take the binary tree implementation and convert the depth-first
traversal function to accept a second argument that is a callback.  Implement
two callback functions - one that prints the integer type nodes, another that
prints the string type nodes (each callback will check the type of the node).
The callback has a single argument - pointer to a node.

## :wrench: Sort `argv`

Use `qsort(3)` function to sort `argv` and print it sorted then.  Check the man
page, you will need to write a function that compares two elements of the array
you provide to the `qsort()` function.

First use `strcmp()` to sort the argument alphabetically, then use `atoi()` (or
a function that actually checks if a string represents a number) to sort them
numerically.

After that, come up with another way of sorting the arguments (e.g. according
to their length etc.) and write a function for it as well.

:key: [argv-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-sort.c)
(for alphabetical sorting only)

# The last initializer and a comma

In C89, having a comma after the last initializer was a syntax error.  Since
C99, it is allowed and optional.

```C
struct s {
	int a;
	int b;
} s = { 1, 2, };	// ',' after 2 is optional
```

See why keeping the last comma always there might be a very good idea:

:eyes: [missing-comma-in-initializer.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/missing-comma-in-initializer.c)

# Enumeration constant

We already know integer constants, character and string constants, a
floating-point constant, and a constant expression (an expression that involves
only constants).

There is one other kind of a constant, the *enumeration constant*.  An
*enumeration* is a list of constant integer values, as in:

```C
enum boolean { NO, YES};
```

The first name has value `0`, the next one `1`, etc.  You can use explicit
values as well.  Unspecified values continue to progress from the last value
specified.  For example:

```C
enum months {
	JAN = 1,
	FEB,
	MAR,
	APR,
	MAY,
	JUN,
	JUL,
	AUG,
	SEP,
	OCT,
	NOV,
	DEC,
};

/* See how you define a variable of an enum. */
enum months mymonth = FEB;
```

You could also do as follows:

```C
enum weird {
	one = 3,
	two,		// 4
	three = 3,
	four = 0,
	five,		// 1
	six,		// 2
	seven = -1,
	...
}

enum weird myweird = six;
```

The list consists of *enumerators*.  I.e. both `JAN = 1` and `FEB` are
enumerators.  When used in code, `JAN`, `FEB`, `MAR` etc. are enumeration
constants.  The values of enumeration constants must fit an `int`.  However,
the implementation may define any integer type to be compatible with the
enumerated type under the condition that all enumeration constants fit the type.
So, the implementation **might** choose a `char` to be compatible with the `enum
boolean` above.

```C
enum white_space { NL = '\n', SP = ' ', TAB = '\t' };
```

The `sizeof` operator applied on an enum itself tells you the integer type used
(`sizeof (enum weird)`), and `sizeof` on any enumeration constant gives you the
same number.

**Names** even in different enumerations must be distinct (that is quite clear
given that how enumerations constants are being used).  In other words, all
enumerators share the same namespace.  Values in the same enumerations need not
be distinct, e.g.:

```C
enum not_really_useful { GGG = 1, HHH = 1, GHGH = 0 };
```

Example: :eyes: [enums.c](src/enums.c), [enum-values.c](src/enum-values.c)

## Use `enum`s!

This:

```C
enum commands {
	XXX_LIST,
	XXX_EXTRACT,
	XXX_CREATE
}
```

is so much better than this:

```C
#define	XXX_LIST	0
#define	XXX_EXTRACT	1
#define	XXX_CREATE	2
```

The reason is that the enum is known to the compiler and may be included into
debug symbols.  So, when debugging, you might, if the compiler/debugger supports
it, see `XXX_LIST` instead of just `0`.  In the latter case, as the compiler
only sees the numbers when compiling the code (macros were replaced by numbers
in the preprocessor phase), you will never see any symbolic names.  So, seeing
the symbols instead of common numbers `0` or `1` is really helping.

:wrench: Convert the binary tree implementation to use enum to store the data
type.

# The `const` keyword

`const` is a *qualifier* that may be applied to the declaration of any variable.
It specifies its value cannot be changed.  If you apply `const` to an array, the
array elements cannot be modified.

Note that the verb *qualify* here means *to limit the strength or meaning of*,
see https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/qualify

You can initialize the variable declared with the `const` qualifier.

:eyes: [const.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/const.c)

Using `const` will not really make the storage constant, you just cannot use
that variable for an assignment to the storage.

```C
int i = 'c';
int const *p2 = &i;

// illegal
*p2 = 'x';
// ok
i = 'x';
```

:eyes: [const-not-really-a-const.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/const-not-really-a-const.c)

It also depends where you apply the `const` keyword.

```C
char const *s1;		// s1 is a pointer to const char
const char *s1;		// same as above
char *const s2;		// s2 is a const pointer to a char

*s1 = 'c';		// illegal
s1 = NULL;		// legal

s2 = NULL;		// illegal
*s2 = 'a';		// legal
```

:eyes: [const-and-pointers.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/const-and-pointers.c)

Using `const` can get a bit confusing.  It is mostly used for pointer arguments
to constant memory to specify that an array will not be changed in the function.
For example, string functions:

```C
size_t strlen(const char *s);
char *strncpy(char *dest, const char *src, size_t n);
...
```

:wrench: Verify how `const` works

The following is a `const` pointer to a `const` character.  So, you can neither
do `*p = ...` nor `p = ...`.  Verify.

```C
const char *const p;
```

:wrench: Take the binary tree implementation and use the `const` keyword where
it makes sense.

# The `typedef` keyword

Note that a `char`, signed and unsigned integer types, and the floating types
are collectively called *basic types*.

We also have *derived types* - an array type, a structure, a union, a function
type, and a pointer type.

With `typedef`, you create new data type **names** for **existing** types.  Note
that you **never** create new data **types** with `typedef`.  In other words,
with `typedef`, you create synonyms to the existing types.

`typedef` is most commonly used for derived types but many type names provided
by the C standard itself are based on basic types.  For example, `size_t`, see
its definition in `/usr/include/sys/types.h`.

You can also create new type names using type names you created before, see
below.

`typedef` is used as follows:

```C
typedef int myint;
typedef char *mycharptr;

mycharptr p = "my string";
```

`typedef` is great to create complex type names in small steps.  As we will
see next.

```C
typedef char **array[10];
array a;
```

:eyes: [derived-types.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/derived-types.c)

The convention is to add `_t` to a new type name.  For example:

```C
typedef struct mystruct_s {
	int a;
	char c;
} mystruct_t;
```

And you can use it like this:

```C
struct mystruct_s x;
mystruct_t y;
```

`x` and `y` are of the same type.

:eyes: [typedef.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/typedef.c)

:wrench: Take the binary tree implementation and use `typedef` for the node
structure itself and also fot the callback.


# Variable namespace and scope

Identifiers fall into several namespaces that do not interfere with one
another.

These distinct classes are:

- objects, functions, `typedef` constants
- labels
- tags of structures or unions, and enumerations
- members of a structure or union individually

The "individual" part means each structure or union has its own namespace.  So,
you can have two different structures, each using the same member names.

:eyes: [identifier-namespace.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/identifier-namespace.c)

# `goto` statement

Any statement may be preceded by a prefix that declares an identifier as a label
name.  Labels by themselves do not alter the flow of control.

Within the same function, you can jump to a label via the *goto* statement.

```C
int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	if (argc == 1)
		goto err;
	/* Process arguments here. */
	return (0);
err:
	errx(1, "missing arguments");
	return (1);
}
```

Use of `goto` in C is often frowned upon unless it is used to jump to an
error/clean-up section or break from structured code.
While even that use is questioned by some, large number of major projects (Linux
kernel code, OpenSSH, OpenSSL, etc.) use it that way.  We strongly believe such
use simplifies the code if done well.

Consider the following code **with conditionals that do not nest**.  It leads to
code duplication (or large amount of indentation to fix that):

```C
int
myfn(void)
{
	/* declarations ommited */

	if ((p = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		return (1);
	if ((p2 = malloc(16)) == NULL) {
		free(p);
		return (1);
	}
	if ((p3 = malloc(16)) == NULL) {
		free(p);
		free(p2);
		return (1);
	}
	if ((p4 = malloc(16)) == NULL) {
		free(p);
		free(p2);
		free(p3);
		return (1);
	}
	/* etc... */

	printf("Success.\n");
	free(p);
	free(p2);
	free(p3);
	free(p4);
	/* ... */
	return (0);
}
```

With the conservative use of `goto`, we can simplify the code as follows:

```C
int
myfn(void)
{
	/* declarations ommited */

	int ret = 1;

	if ((p = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		return (1);
	if ((p2 = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		goto err;
	if ((p3 = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		goto err2;
	if ((p4 = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		goto err3;
	/* etc... */

	/* Getting here means all went fine. */
	ret = 0;
	printf("Success.\n");

	free(p4);
err3:
	free(p3);
err2:
	free(p2);
err:
	free(p);
	return (ret);
}
```

The good thing is that you clean up at one common place at the end of the
function.  If there is something new that needs to be cleaned up after the code
is modified, you add it to the clean-up section.  In the former example, you
would have to check all error paths and modify those one by one.

**We support reasonable use of `goto` for the clean-up and structured code
breaks**.  If used wisely, it leads to cleaner code and saves lots of
indentation.  Also note that the `break` and `continue` statements are jumps as
well, and imagine how to structure your code without it.

# `switch` statement

```C
switch (expression) {
	case constant1:
		// statements
		break;
	case constant2:
		// statements
		break;
	.
	.
	.
	default:
		// default statements
}
```

Each `case` is a label.  For that reason, you must `break` unless you want to
code fall through.  The reason for that is historical and time showed it was not
the right decision.

Very often used for command line option processing.

```C
int opt;

while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, "c:")) != -1) {
	switch (opt) {
	case 'c':
		/*
		 * optarg should be copied since it might be
		 * overwritten by another option or freed by getopt()
		 */
		if ((code = strdup(optarg)) == NULL)
			err(1, "cannot alloc memory for -c optarg");
		break;
	case '?':
		fprintf(stderr, "unknown option: '%c'\n", optopt);
		usage(argv0);
		break;
	}
}
```

:eyes: [switch.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/switch.c)

Also note that "any statement may be **preceded** by... a label".  As `case` is
a label as well (only valid within the `switch` statement though), you cannot
have a declaration right after the `case` label, because declaration is not a
statement. Similarly, you also cannot have a label right before a closing `}`.
So, a *null statement* to the rescue:

```C
switch (c) {
case 'a':
	;	/* must be here as a declaration is not a statement. */
	int a;
	/* ... */
default:
	;	/* must be here as the closing '}' is not a statement. */
}
```

The other alternative would be to move the first statement that follows the
variable declaration before it.


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## Linked list, part II.

(Note: this assignment was given in one of the previous years as the assignment
for the final in-person test with the 90 minute limit).

```C
/*
 * Create a set of functions for manipulating a linked list.  The program
 * accepts input commands as command line arguments and executes them.  New
 * elements are always appended to the list and any item is always removed from
 * the head.  Keep pointers to the first list item (head) and the last one
 * (tail).
 *
 * Commands are: create a list, insert an item, remove an item, and print the
 * list.  It is mandatory to create a list before doing anything else.
 *
 *   create a list:		C
 *   insert an item:		I<nnn>
 *   remove an item:		R
 *   print a list:		P
 *
 * Do reasonable checking for dealing with invalid input.  See below.
 *
 * Example:
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 P R P I6 P I7 P R P R P R P R R R P I88 P R P
 *   List: 1 2 3 4 5
 *   List: 2 3 4 5
 *   List: 2 3 4 5 6
 *   List: 2 3 4 5 6 7
 *   List: 3 4 5 6 7
 *   List: 4 5 6 7
 *   List: 5 6 7
 *   List: EMPTY
 *   List: 88
 *   List: EMPTY
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C R
 *   a.out: Cannot remove an item from an empty list.
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C P
 *   List: EMPTY
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C L
 *   a.out: Wrong command: L
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C C
 *   a.out: List already created, exiting.
 *
 *   $ ./a.out I88
 *   a.out: List not created yet.
 */
```

:eyes: [linked-list.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linked-list.c)

## :wrench: Animal sorting

You may remember
[working with an animal structure.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/home-assignments/animals.md)

Use the same structure for this assignment.

:wrench: Sort the array by number of legs, print it out to standard output.

:wrench: Sort the array by the animal name. Print it out to standard output.
Use `strcmp()` to do the comparison of names.

Make the comparison functions static.

Use the standard libc sort function qsort(3).  Check the manual page on how it's
used.  You will need to define a callback function that the qsort() function
will use to compare two array elements.

Make the program to accept an argument (0 or 1) and run the sorting function
based on that.

- :key: [animal-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal-sort.c)
- :key: [animals.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animals.h)
- :key: [animal.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal.h)

Bonus: Sort the animals based on both name and number of legs.

