# Introduction

- all information on http://mff.devnull.cz/c-prog-lang
	- see the References section for materials
- make sure you DO SUBSCRIBE TO THE MAILING LIST (see the seminar http page
  above)
- getting credits - see the seminar page
- what is C
- C89, C99, C11 (ie. 2011) standards.  Due to time constraints, we will focus on
  C99.
- why it's worth to learn C
	- helps with better understanding of computers
	- lingua franca of programming
	- lots of important code in C (Linux, Android kernel, parts of iOS
	  kernel, parts of Windows kernel, OpenSSH, OpenSSL, Apache, etc. etc.)
	- C programmers will be needed virtually for ever
	- fast, very portable
		- however, now at the expense of having very complex compilers
		  (see e.g. https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=3212479)
	- still cool and fun
- objectives of the seminar
	- you should be able to write and understand non-trivial C code (we
	  focus on C99)
	- you should be able to recognise whether C is appropriate for solving a
	  specific problem
	- why it's so easy to get burned when working in C
		- [A Case Study of Toyota Unintended Acceleration and Software
		  Safety](https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/pubs/koopman14_toyota_ua_slides.pdf)
- we are here to help you understand concepts, see the big picture, and learn
  new stuff.  SO, IF YOU HAVE A QUESTION, ASK.
	- Ideally use the mailing list so that it's beneficial for others, too.
- please do read the C style document and DO USE the C style.  The link is on
  the seminar page, or you can get it here: http://mff.devnull.cz/cstyle/.
- source code files are in https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/tree/master/src

# First C program: "Hello, world"

- :eyes: [hello-world1.c](/src/hello-world1.c), will compile with warnings
- use `gcc hello-world1.c` to compile it, `./a.out` to run it
	- or `gcc -o hello-world1 hello-world1.c` if you want a specific output
- we recommend vim(1) to edit your files (use ":syntax on" for syntax
  highlighting if not the default settings)
	- see http://mff.devnull.cz/vim-tips.html
- C runtime system is very small, printf is not part of it, that's why you need
  an include file to provide the function prototype (ie. the return type and its
  parameters)
- fixed code with no warnings: hello-world2.c

# Basics

- each program **must** have a `main()` function
	- well, there are exceptions: see
	  [freestanding environment](/modules/freestanding-environment.md) if
	  interested.  It it out of scope for this seminar though.

- string literals
	- :eyes: [printf.c](/src/printf.c)

- use the `return` operator to return a function value
	- in the `main()` funtion, return exits the program
	- in the shell, use `echo $?` to see the return value of the most
	  recently run program on the foreground
	- only the least significant byte taken as an unsigned integer (0-255)
	  is relevant
	- [return.c](/src/return.c)
	- if you do not use return from main() and the ending } is reached, the
	  program returns 0 (in C89 it would be a random number though).

- you must declare a variable before you can use it
	- :eyes: [declaration.c](/src/declaration.c)

- `printf()` can use *conversion specifications*, each starts with `%`
	- `int i; printf("%d\n", i);`
		- a character like `d` is called a *conversion specifier*
	- see `man 3 printf` for the gory details
	- number of conversions must match the number of arguments
		- :eyes: [printf2.c](/src/printf2.c)
		- the compiler will warn you but it will let you do it (use
		  `-Werror` to treat warnings as errors)
		- it will print garbage for conversions without a matching
		  argument (whatever is on the stack is printed).

- you can declare and initialize a variable at the same time
	- `int i = 13;`
	- `13` is called an *initializer*
	- you can initialize a variable with an expression as well
		- `int i = 13; int j = i;`

- arithmetics
	- `==` is for equality, `=` for an assignment
		- memory was precious in the past, and programs usually had more
		  assignments than comparisons
	- `+`, `-`, `/`, `*`
	- `++`, `--`
		- `int i; i = 13; printf("%d\n", i++);` will print `13` and then
		  increment `i`
		- `int i; i = 13; printf("%d\n", ++i);` will first increment `i`
		  then print `14`
		- `++i` is an expression, not a variable, so you cannot assign to it
			- this will not compile: `++i = 13;`
	- :eyes: [arithmetics.c](/src/arithmetics.c)

- save for an assignment, anywhere you can use a variable, you can use an
  expression
	```C
	printf("%d\n", 100 * 2);
	```

- if both operands are ints, the result is an int
	- `printf("%d\n", 9 / 5)` will print `1`

- while loop
	- :eyes: [while.c](/src/while.c)

- floating point numbers
	- :eyes: [float.c](/src/float.c)
	- see the optional minimum field width and precision
	- experiment!!!

- :wrench: print out a table for inch to centimeter conversion
	- :eyes: [inches-to-cm.c](/src/inches-to-cm.c)
	- use "\t" escape sequence for printf to print tabelators
	- like this:
	```C
	printf("\tX\tY\n");
	```

- :wrench: use floats for the conversion code
	- :eyes: [inches-to-cm2.c](/src/inches-to-cm2.c)
		- '\t' in a string will print a tab
		- `6` is the minimum field width 
		- `.2` is the precision
		- see the printf(3) man page for details

- :wrench: print fahrenheit to centigrade table.  Use floats.
	- :eyes: [fahr-to-cent.c](/src/fahr-to-cent.c)

# assignment for the first class

```
  /*
   * Implement a moving star that zick zacks on the __SAME__ line between some
   * boundary (say 50 character wide).
   *
   * You will only need:
   *	- while loop
   *	- printf()
   *	- use a character '\r' to return to the beginning of a line
   *	- use "poll(NULL, 0, <ms>)" to sleep <ms> miliseconds, do not worry
   *	  about not understanding what exactly it does
   *    - you will also need "fflush(stdout)" after each line is printed.  As
   *      standard error is buffered, the text will generally not be printed by
   *      printf() until a new line is printed, which will never be the case
   *      here.  So, "fflush" makes sure all buffered text is printed out.
   *
   * You will something like this:
   *
   * |                                            *     |
   */
```

