# Recap of the last class

Comments, preprocessor, expressions, `break`, operators, `_Bool`, integer types,
signedness, modifiers for `printf`(), L/U suffices, `sizeof` operator, integer
literals, `getchar`().

# Warm-up

Print out number of words read from the standard input.  Ideally, use your
`getchar`() based code from your repository to start with.

**Always try to reuse code you have already written!**

A *word* is defined as a group of any characters surrounded by whitespace
characters.  For our case these white space characters will suffice: a
tabelator, a space, and a newline.

- write your own check for a whitespace character, do not use library functions
  for that

- check correctness of your implementation with `wc -w <file>`

- what happens if the number of words exceeds the type that stores the count?

:eyes: [words.c](/src/words.c), it actually uses a library check for white
space for simplicity

:eyes: another solution is [words2.c](/src/words2.c).  It is even simpler than
the first solution while not using the library function.

Example:

```
$ cat /etc/passwd | ./a.out
70
```


# Array Intro

You define an array like this `int array[<some-number>]`, for example:

```C
int array[5];
```

The integer value `n` in `[n]` specifies the number of array *elements*.

- an array *subscript* always starts from `0` and ends with `n - 1`
- a subscript may be any integer expression

So, `int array[3]` elements will be accessible as `a[0]` .. `a[2]`, each element
is of type `int`, and therefore you can do e.g. `printf("%d\n", a[2]);`.

- `0` as the first subscript so it is easier to work with *pointers* and
  efficiency for array access - we will get to pointers later.

- what is not possible to do with arrays in C (limitations are important
  knowledge):

	- associative arrays
	- array subscripts returning a sub-array (like found e.g. in Python)
	- assigning to an array as a whole

- as with integer and floating point variables, we may initialize an array
  during its definition.  In general, the value for the initialization is known
  as an *initializer*.

```C
short array[3] = { 1, 2, 3 };
```

If the array size is omitted the compiler will compute the size from the the
number of initializers.  So, you can just do the following.

```C
short array[] = { 1, 2, 3 };
```

Note that if you need your array to contain only the elements from the
initializer, omitting the array size is the way to go to avoid errors as in
changing the initializer while forgetting to update the array size.

- the `sizeof` operator on array always gets **the array size in bytes**.  It
  will **not** get the array size in elements.

  	- to get the number of elements in an array, you must divide the array
	  size in bytes by the size of its element.  Always use `0` subscript,
	  see below on why.

```C
int a[5];

printf("Elements in array: %zu\n", sizeof (a) / sizeof (a[0]));
```

The above is the correct approach that is immune to changing the array
declaration (i.e. the type of elements).  Do not use the following:

```C
    sizeof (array) / sizeof (int)
```

Arrays introduced so far are not dynamic and **can not** be resized.

- try to perform out-of-bound access. What is the threshold for
  behavior change on your system ?
- why is it not faulting for the one-off error?

:eyes: [array-out-of-bounds.c](/src/array-out-of-bounds.c)


```
$ ./a.out
Number of array elements: 1024
One-off error (using index 1024)... OK
Assigning to index 4096... Segmentation Fault
```

You do not need to initialize all elements.  With such type of an
initialization, you always start from subscript `0`, and there are no gaps:

```C
  short array[4] = { 1, 2, 3 };
```

In the example above, the elements not explicitly initalized are set to `0` so
the value of `array[3]` will be initialized to `0`.

- i.e. `int array[100] = { 0 };` will have all values set to `0`

- the initialization is done by a compiler

- using `= {}` is not allowed by the C specification (allowed in C++) but
  generally accepted.  Not with `-Wpedantic` though:

```
cc -Wpedantic test.c
test.c:1:13: warning: use of GNU empty initializer extension
      [-Wgnu-empty-initializer]
int a[10] = {};
	    ^
1 warning generated.
```

Note: **global variables are always zeroized.**

There is a *partial array initialization* where the *initializers* are called
*designated initializers* in the C spec:

  char array[128] = { [0] = 'A', [2] = 'f', [4] = 'o', [6] = 'o' };

- a subscript is in square brackets
- the `[subscript]` is known as a *designator*.  Inreasing ordering is not
  required but expected.
- the rest of elements will be initialized to zero
- if you do not specify the array size, it is taken from the highest designator
  index 
- you can combine designators with fixed order initializers, and you always
  start with the next index.  For example:

```C
  /* a[5] is 'e' etc.  a[0]..a[3] are NUL characters (= zero bytes). */
  char a[128] = { [4] = 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o' };
```

- you cannot specify a repetition or setting multiple elements to the same value
  (there is a gcc extension for that but let's not go there).

:eyes: [array-designated-initializers.c](/src/array-designated-initializers.c)

Note the code above mentions a missing `=` as a GCC extension.  With a non-GCC
compiler it does not compile:

```
$ cc array-designated-initializers.c
"array-designated-initializers.c", line 15: syntax error before or at: 'A'
cc: acomp failed for array-designated-initializers.c
```

Once declared, the values cannot be assigned at once.  So, you can only do
things as follows:

```C
int array[4];

array[0] = 1;
array[1] = 2;
array[2] = array[3] = 3;
// ...
```

You cannot assign an array into array - has to be done an element by element.

- likewise for comparison

Arrays cannot be declared as empty (`int a[0]`).

- this is explicitly forbidden by the standard, see
  [C99](/modules/c99-standard.md) 6.7.5.2 Array declarators.
- GCC accepts that though.  Do not use it like that.

:eyes: [empty-array.c](/src/empty-array.c)

This might be a bit confusing though:

```
$ gcc empty-array.c
$ ./a.out
4
0
```

Even if a compiler supports an empty array declaration, `sizeof() /
sizeof(a[0])` construction is always correct to compute a number of array
elements.  Plus, the compiler does not do any array access when computing
sizeof(a[0]) as the expression is not evaluated (see lecture 02 on the `sizeof`
operator), the compiler only uses the argument to determine the size.


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.


Do [digit occurence](/modules/count-digit-occurence.md) as in the last class but
now use an array for counting the figures.

# Function introduction

Functions can be used to encapsulate some work, for code re-factoring, etc.

A function has a single return value and multiple input parameters.

- if you also need to extract an error code with the value or get multiple
  return values that needs to be done via passing data via reference (more on
  that when we have pointers)
- i.e. this is not like Go that returns the error along with the data

A function *declaration* is only declaring the API without its body.  It is
called a *function prototype* and it consists of a type, a function name, and an
argument list in parentheses:

```C
int digit(int c);
int space(int c);
float myfun(int c, int i, float f);
```

When *defining* the function, its body is inclosed in `{}` (just like the `main`
function).

```C
int
return_a_number(void)
{
	return (1000);
}
```

Also as with the `main` function, you can use `void` instead of the argument
list to say the function accepts no arguments.

```C
void
hola(void)
{
	printf("Hola!\n");
}
```

A function call is an expression so you can you it as such:

```C
printf("%d\n", return_a_number());
```

The default return value type is an `int` but a compiler will warn if it is
missing.  You should always specify the type in
[C99+](/modules/c99-standard.md).  You may use `void` which means the function
does returns no value.

Write your function declarations at the beginning of a C file or include those
into a separate header file.

If a compiler hits a function whose prototype is unknown, warnings are issued.
Remember [src/hello-world1.c](/src/src/hello-world1.c)?  See also here:

```
$ cat test.c
int
main(void)
{
	fn();
}

float
fn(void)
{
	return (1.0);
}
$
$ gcc test.c
test.c:4:2: warning: implicit declaration of function 'fn' is
invalid in C99
      [-Wimplicit-function-declaration]
	fn();
	^
test.c:8:1: error: conflicting types for 'fn'
fn(void)
^
test.c:4:2: note: previous implicit declaration is here
	fn();
	^
1 warning and 1 error generated.
```

Argument names may be omitted in prototypes, i.e.:

```C
int myfn(int, int);
```

A variable defined in function parameters or locally within the function
overrides global variables.  Each identifier is visible (= can be used) only
within a region of program text called its *scope*.  See
[C99](/modules/c99-standard.md), section *6.2.1 Scopes of identifiers* for more
information.

Within a function body, you may use its arguments as any other local variables.

```C
int
myfn(int i, int j)
{
	i = i * j;
	return (i);
}
```

As **arguments are always passed by value** in C, the variable value is not
changed in scope that called the function.

```C
/* myfn defined here */

int
main(void)
{
	int i = 3;

	myfn(i, i);
	printf("%d\n", i);	// will print 3
}
```

Local variables are on the stack.

Variable passing depends on bitness and architecture. E.g. 32-bit x86 on the
stack, 64-bit x64 ABI puts first 6 arguments to registers, the rest on the
stack.

Functions can be recursive.  :eyes: [recursive-fn.c](/src/recursive-fn.c)

```C
/*
 * Print 0..9 recursively using a function call fn(9).
 */
#include <stdio.h>

void
myfn(int depth)
{
	if (depth != 0)
		myfn(depth - 1);
	printf("%d\n", depth);
}

int
main(void)
{
	myfn(9);
}

```

:wrench: Print 9..0 using a recursive function.

:eye: solution [recursive-fn2.c](/src/recursive-fn2.c)


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.


:wrench: Print total number of (decimal) numbers, white space (tab, space,
newline) and anything else from the input.  I.e. it will print out three
numbers.

Obviously, reuse code you wrote for [digit occurence
counting](/src/count-digit-occurence.md).

- write the program using direct comparisons

```C
c >= '0' && c <= '9'
c == ' ' || c == '\t' || c == '\n'
```

- move both the checks into functions
- then write a new version and use:
	- use isspace() from C99
	- isdigit() vs isnumber() - the latter detects digits + possibly more
	  characters (depending on locale setting)

# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## :wrench: Count letter occurrence

- count occurrences of all ASCII letters on standard input and print out
  a histogram
- this will be case insensitive (i.e. implement mytolower(int) first)

- the output will look like this:

```
$ cat /some/file | ./a.out
a: ***
b: *
c: *****************************
...
z: *******
$
```

- use a function to print a specific number of stars
- use a function to do all the printing
- declare array(s) to be as efficient as possible
	- that is, having the lowest possible size
	- only use global variables if necessary

