# Array of characters

An array of characters (`char`s) is called a *string* or a *string constant*.
Do not confuse it with a *character constant* as in `'A'`.  A string is put in
double quotes `""`.

So, `"hello, world"` as string.

Technically, a string constant is an array of characters and may be used to
initialize a char array:

```C
char foo[] = "bar";
```

A special thing is that a string is always terminated by a NUL (zero) byte.
That is how C knows where a string ends.

That means the size of the array is **one byte more than the number of
characters in the string**.  It is because of the terminating zero (`\0`) that
the compiler adds to terminate the string.

So, you could use the initializer as introduced earlier:

```C
char foo[] = { 'b', 'a', 'r', '\0' };

printf("%zu\n", sizeof (foo));		// prints 4
printf("%zu\n", sizeof ("bar"));	// prints 4
```

However, that is no generally used, you would use `"bar"` to initialize such an
array.

Using `'\0'` suggests it is a terminating NUL character, and it is just a zero
byte.  So, you could just use `0`, like this, but it is not generally used:

```C
char foo[] = { 'b', 'a', 'r', 0 };
```

To print a string via `printf`(), you use the `%s` conversion specifier:

```C
printf("%s\n", foo);
```

:wrench: What happens if you forget to specify the terminating zero in the above
per-char init and try to print the string ?

:eyes: [array-char-nozero.c](/src/array-char-nozero.c)

# Strings

- "xxx" is called a *string literal* or a *string constant*

- in memory it is a consecutive piece of memory: `'x' 'x' 'x' '\0'`

- `'\0'` terminates the string.  That's the C convention.

- `'\0'` is called a `NUL` character.  It's just a 0 byte but the convention is
  to use `'\0'` if it represents a string element.  `'\0'` is just a special
  case of octal representation `'\0ooo'` where 'o' is an octal figure (0-7).

- aside from the `{ 'x', ... }` initializer, character array initialization may
  be done also with a string literal:

```C
	/* sizeof (a) is 6 as the terminating 0 is counted in */
	char a[] = "hello";
```

- if {} is used, you must add the terminating zero yourself unless you use the
  size of the array and the string was shorter (in which case the rest would be
  initialized to zero):

```C
	char s[] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0' };
```

  Anyway, you would probably never do it this way.  Just use `= "hello"`.

  :eyes: code: [array-fill.c](/src/array-fill.c)

- string is printed via printf as `%s`

```C
	printf("%s\n", "hello, world");
```

- experiment with what `%5s` and `%.5s` do (use any reasonable number)

eyes: code: [string-format.c](/src/string-format.c)

# warmup

task:

  - extend the program tr-d-chars.c from last time to translate character input
    e.g.
```
    tail /etc/passwd | tr 'abcdefgh' '123#'
```
  - use character arrays defined with string literals to represent the 2 strings
    - see the tr(1) man page on what needs to happen if the 1st string is longer
      than the 2nd
      - do not store the expanded 2nd string as literal in your program !

  :eyes: code: [tr.c](/src/tr.c)

task (bonus): refactor the code into function
- remember that arrays are passed into function as a pointer (to
  be explained soon, not needed now) that can be used inside the
  function with array subscript

# the "for" loop

formally defined:
```
	for (<init>; <predicate>; <update>)
		<body>
```

  - it is the same as:

```
	<init>
	while (<predicate>) {
		<body>
		<update>
	}
```
  - Using the for loop is very often easier and more readable.

  Example:
```C
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
		printf("%d\n", i);
```

  - or in C99:

```C
	for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
		printf("%d\n", i);
```

  - if `break` jump statement happens in the body, the control is transferred to
    the end of the loop without executing the `<update>` part.
  - with `continue` jump statement, the rest of the body is skipped.
    The `<update>` part is then performed for the `for` loop but not for the
    `while` loop.
  - both `break` and `continue` statements relate to the loop they are executed in

:eyes: code: [for.c](/src/for.c)

task: compute minimum of averages of lines in 2-D integer array (of arbitrary
      dimensions) that have positive values.

   :eyes: code: [2darray-min-avg.c](/src/2darray-min-avg.c)



# Expressions

> "In mathematics, an expression or mathematical expression is a finite
combination of symbols that is well-formed according to rules that depend on
the context."

In C, expressions are, amongst others, variables, constants, strings, and
expressions in parentheses.  Also arithmetic expressions, relational
expressions, function calls, sizeof, assignments, and ternary expressions.

  http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/expressions

In C99, expression can produce results (2+2 gets 4) or generate side effects
(printf("foo") sends string literal to standard output).

:eyes: code: [expression-statement.c](/src/expression-statement.c)

:wrench: task: make the warning an error with your choice of compiler (would be a variant
      of `-W` in GCC)

# Statements

Statements are (only from what we already learned), expressions, selections
("if", "switch" (not introduced yet)), {} blocks (known as *compounds*),
iterations, and jumps ("goto" (not introduced yet), "continue", "break",
"return").

  http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/statements

Basically, statements are pieces of code executed in sequence. The function body
is a compound statement. The compound statement (a.k.a. *block*) is a sequence
of statements and declarations. Blocks can be nested. Blocks inside function
body are good for variable reuse.

Semicolon is not used after a compound but it is allowed.

**A declaration is not a statement** (there are subtle consequences, we can show
them later).

Some statements must end with `;`.  For example, expression statements.  The
following are all valid statements.  They do not make much sense though and will
probably generate a warning about an unused result.

```C
	char c;

	c;
	1 + 1;
	1000;
	"hello";
```

:eyes: code: [null-statement.c](/src/null-statement.c),
[compound-statement.c](/src/compound-statement.c)

## w.r.t. compound statement vs. expression:

 - it is not allowed to have compound statement within expression
   - that said, GCC has a language extension (gcc99) that can be used to allow
     this - the reason is for protecting multiple evaluation within macros
   - the C99 standard does not define this, therefore it's not there

- gotcha: the code has to be compiled with gcc with the -pedantic-errors
  	  option in order to reveal the problem

```
  gcc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic-errors compound-statement-invalid.c
```

  - our recommendation is to always use these options

:eyes: code: [compound-statement-invalid.c](/src/compound-statement-invalid.c)

# err() family of functions

  - not defined by any standard however handy
  - present in BSD, glibc (= Linux distros), Solaris, macOS, etc.
  - use the `<err.h>` include, see the err(3) man page
  - this is especially handy when working with I/O
  - instead of writing:

```C
	if (error) {
		fprintf(stderr, "error occured: %s\n", strerror(errno));
		exit(1);
	}
```

- write the following

```C
      if (error)
             err(1, "error occured: ");
```

  - notice it is not necessary to use newline
  - or for functions that do not modify the `errno` value, use the *x* variant:

```C
	if (some_error)
		errx(1, "ERROR: %d", some_error);
```

  - there's also `warn()`/`warnx()` that do not exit the program

# File API

part of the standard since C90

# Opening/closing

- `fopen` opens the file and returns opaque handle (pointer)
  - `NULL` pointer means error
  - the `mode` argument controls the behavior: read, write, append
    - the `+` adds the other mode (write for read and vice versa, read for append)
  - write mode creates the file
  - the `b` binary mode does not usually have any effect (see the standard)
- `fclose` closes the handle
  - important to avoid resource leak (it can allocate both memory and file descriptor)
- `freopen` can be used to associate the standard streams (`stderr`, `stdin`, or `stdout`) with a file

:wrench: write a code that opens the same file in an cycle (until `fopen()` fails) without calling `fclose()` on the handle. After how many iterations does it fail on your system ?

:eyes: code: [fopen-leak.c](/src/fopen-leak.c)

# I/O

- `fprintf` - `printf` to a stream
- `fscanf` 
  - basically parses text input from a stream according to format string
  - except the format string all the parameters must be pointers
- `fputs`/`fgets` - send/read string to/from a stream
- `fputc`/`fgetc` - send/read `char` to/from a stream
- `fwrite`/`fread` - for writing/reading binary data (such as structures or raw numeric types)

# Seeking

When reading/writing to a file using the above function, the current position changes accordingly.
The position can be manipulated without performing any I/O.

- `fseek` - moves the position
  - the `whence` parameter has 3 possible values and makes the `offset` parameter relative to:
    - `SEEK_SET` - the beginning of the file
    - `SEEK_END` - the end of the file
    - `SEEK_CUR` - the current location of the cursor in the file
- `ftell` - get current position in the file

:wrench: get a file size using the standard IO API (that is, `lseek(2)` is
prohibited even if you know it).

:wrench: write array of 3 `int` values to a file and read the values into another array and print them to standard error output without closing the file in between the writing and reading. :eyes: code [fopen-binary.c](/src/fopen-binary.c)

# Pointers

Motivation:
  - memory allocation / shared memory
  - protocol buffer parsing
  - pointer arithmetics

  - the value stored in "pointer" variable is the address of the memory
    storing given type
  - declared like this, e.g.

    `int *p; // pointer to an int`

    - note on style:

```C
      int * p;
      int *p;  // preferred in this lecture
```

  - good practice is to prefix pointers with the 'p' letter

  - a pointer is always associated with a type

  - to access the object the pointer points to, use a de-reference operator `*`:

```C
	printf("%d", *p);
```

  - the de-reference is also used to write value to the variable pointed:

```C
	*p = 5;
```

  - in a declaration, you may assign like this:

```C
	int i = 5;
	int *p = &i;
```

  - the `&` is an *address-of* operator and gets the address of the variable.

  - the pointer itself is obviously stored in memory too

```
     +---------------+
     |     addr2     |
     +---------------+
     ^                        +-------+
     |                        | value |
   addr1                      +-------+
                              ^
                              |
                            addr2
```

  - the size of the pointer depends on architecture and the way the program
    was compiled (see `-m32` / `-m64` command line switches of gcc)

    - `sizeof (p)` will return the amount of memory to store the address of the
      object the pointer points to
    - `sizeof (*p)` will return the amount needed to store the object the
      pointer points to

:wrench: Task: write a program to print:
   - address of the pointer
   - the address where it points to
   - the value of the pointed to variable

Use the `%p` formatting for the first two.

:eyes: Code: [ptr-basics.c](/src/ptr-basics.c)

## NULL pointer

  - the real danger with pointers is that invalid access results in a crash (the
    program is terminated by kernel)

    - this is because `NULL` address is left unmapped on purpose, or a page that
      cannot be accessed maps to the address.  Note that C guarantees that zero
      is never a valid address for data.

  - can assign a number directly to a pointer (that should trigger a warning
    though.  We will get to casting and how to fix that later).

```C
	int *p = 0x1234;
```

  - special pointer value, `NULL`, is defined and it is called *a null pointer
    constant* [in the C spec](/modules/c99-standard.md).

Task: create NULL pointer and try to read from it / write to it

:eyes: Code: [null-ptr.c](/src/null-ptr.c)

## Basic operations

  - notice the difference:

```C
    int i;
    int *p = &i;
```

vs.

```C
    int i;
    int *p;

    // set value of the pointer (i.e. the address where it points to).
    p = &i;
```

  - operator precedence gotcha:
```
	*p		// value of the pointed to variable
	*p + 1		// the value + 1
	*(p + 1)	// the value on the address + 1 (see below for what it
			// means)
```
   - note that the & reference operator is possible to use only on variables
     - thus this is invalid:
```
	p = &(i + 1);
```
  - store value to the address pointed to by the pointer:
```
	*p = 1;
```
## Changing pointers:

- pointers can be moved forward and backward
```
	p = p + 1;
	p++;
	p--;
```
## operator gotchas

- `*` has bigger precedence than `+` so:
```
	i = *p + 1;
```
is equal to
```
	i = (*p) + 1;
```
- postfix `++` has higher precedence than `*`:
```
	i = *p++;
```
is evaluated as `*(p++)` but it still does the following because `++` is used in
postfix mode, ie. the value of expression `p++` is `p`:
```
        i = *p; p++;
```
- the pointer is moved by the amount of underlying (domain) data type when using
  arithmetics

# Home assignment

:wrench: Task: create pointer to int, print it, create new pointer that points to
      `p + 1`. See what is the difference between the 2 pointers.

:eyes: Code: [ptr-diff.c](/src/ptr-diff.c)

