# Strings and String Constants

We already know what a
[string](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/string.md)
is.  It is an array of non-null characters terminated by a null byte.

- `"xxx"` is called a *string literal* or a *string constant*

	- do not confuse it with a *character constant*, e.g. `'A'`, as it uses
	  single quotes.  In contrast to Python, for example, single and double
	  quotes are two different things in C.

- **a string constant internally initializes an array of characters, with a null
  character appended.**

- we already know that a *string* is a contiguous sequence of characters
  terminated by and including the first null character

	- so, a string literal may include multiple null characters, thus
	  defining multiple strings.  In other words, a *string literal* and a
	  *string* are two different things.

```C
$ cat main.c
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
	printf("%s\n", "hello\0world.");
}
$ cc main.c
$ ./a.out
hello
```

- note that `'\0'` is just a special case of octal representation `'\ooo'`,
  called *octal escape sequence*, where `o` is an octal figure (0-7).  You can
  use any ASCII character like that.

	- the full syntax is `'\o'`, `'\oo'`, or `'\ooo'` 

```C
$ cat main.c
/*
 * The code assumes that our environment uses ASCII but that is not mandatory.
 * See 5.2.1 Character Sets in the C99 standard for more information.
 */
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
	/* Check the ascii manual page that 132 is 'Z', and 71 is '9'. */
	printf("%c\n", '\132');
	printf("%c\n", '\71');
	/* Will print "a<tab>b" */
	printf("a\11b\n");
}
$ ./a.out
Z
9
a	b
```

- a string constant may be used to initialize a char array and usually that is
  how the string initialization is used (in contrast to `{ 'a', 'b', ... }`)

```C
int
main(void)
{
	char s[] = "hello, world.";

	printf("%s\n", s);
}
```

```
$ gcc -Wall -Wextra main.c
$ ./a.out
hello, world.
```

- remember that if `{}` is used for the initialization, **you must add the
  terminating zero yourself** unless you use the size of the array and the
  string was shorter (in which case the rest would be initialized to zero as
  usual):

```C
char s[] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0' };
```

- so, the following is still a propertly terminated string but do not use it
  like that

```C
char s[10] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o' };
```

Anyway, you would probably never do it this way.  Just use `= "hello"`.

:eyes: [array-fill.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-fill.c)
:eyes: [array-fill2.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-fill2.c)

- string is printed via `printf()` as `%s`

```C
printf("%s\n", "hello, world");
```

- experiment with what `%5s` and `%.5s` do (use any reasonable number)

:eyes: [string-format.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/string-format.c)

# Warm-up

- :wrench: extend the program :eyes: [tr-d-chars.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/tr-d-chars.c)
  from last time to translate character input, e.g.
```
tail /etc/passwd | tr 'abcdefgh' '123#'
```
  - use character arrays defined with string literals to represent the 2 strings
    - see the tr(1) man page on what needs to happen if the 1st string is longer
      than the 2nd
      - do not store the expanded 2nd string as literal in your program !
        (i.e. not `123#####`)

:key: [tr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/tr.c)

:wrench: (bonus): refactor the code into a function(s)

- remember that arrays are passed into a function as a pointer (to be explained
  soon, not needed now) which can be used inside the function with an array
  subscript.

# The `for` loop

Formally defined as:

```
for (<init>; <predicate>; <update>)
	<body>
```

It is the same as:

```
<init>
while (<predicate>) {
	<body>
	<update>
}
```

Using the for loop is very often easier and more readable.

Example:
```C
int i;
for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i) {
	printf("%d\n", i);
}
```

Or in C99:

```C
for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i) {
	printf("%d\n", i);
}
```

- the `break` statement terminates execution of the loop (i.e. it jumps right
  **after** the enclosing `}`)

- with the `continue` statement, the execution jumps to the end of the loop body
  (i.e. it jumps **at** the enclosing `}`).  That means the execution continues
  with the `<predicate>` test.

- both `break` and `continue` statements relate to the smallest enclosing loop
  they are executed in

:eyes: [for.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/for.c)

:wrench: task: compute minimum of averages of lines in 2-D integer array (of
arbitrary dimensions) that have positive values (if there is negative value in
given line, do not use the line for computation).

:eyes: [2darray-min-avg.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/2darray-min-avg.c)

# Expressions

> "In mathematics, an expression or mathematical expression is a finite
combination of symbols that is well-formed according to rules that depend on
the context."

In C, expressions are, amongst others, variables, constants, strings, and
expressions in parentheses.  Also arithmetic expressions, relational
expressions, function calls, sizeof, assignments, and ternary expressions.

http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/expressions

In C99, an expression can produce results (2+2 gets 4) or generate side effects
(`printf("foo")` sends a string literal to the standard output).

:eyes: [expression-statement.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/expression-statement.c)

:wrench: task: make the warning an error with your choice of compiler (would be
a variant of `-W` in GCC)

# Statements

Statements are (only from what we already learned), expressions, selections
(`if`, `switch` (not introduced yet)), `{}` blocks (known as *compounds*),
iterations, and jumps (`goto` (not introduced yet), `continue`, `break`,
`return`).

http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/statements

Basically, statements are pieces of code executed in sequence. The function body
is a compound statement. The compound statement (a.k.a. *block*) is a sequence
of statements and declarations.  Blocks can be nested.  Blocks inside a function
body are good for variable reuse.

A semicolon is not used after a compound statement but it is allowed.  The
following is valid code then:

```C
int
main(void)
{
	{ }
	{ };
}
```

**A declaration is not a statement** (there are subtle consequences, we can show
them later).

Some statements must end with `;`.  For example, expression statements.  The
following are all valid expression statements.  They do not make much sense
though and may generate a warning about an unused result.

```C
/* this one is not a statement */
char c;

/* these are all expression statements */
c;
1 + 1;
1000;
"hello";
```

:eyes: [null-statement.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/null-statement.c)
:eyes: [compound-statement.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/compound-statement.c)

## w.r.t. compound statement vs. expression:

- It is not allowed to have a compound statement within an expression.
  - That said, GCC has a language extension (gcc99) that can be used to allow
    this - the reason is for protecting multiple evaluation within macros.
  - The C99 standard does not define it.
  - gotcha: the following code has to be compiled with `gcc` with the
    `-pedantic-errors` option in order to reveal the problem

```
gcc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic-errors compound-statement-invalid.c

compound-statement-invalid.c: In function ‘main’:
compound-statement-invalid.c:8:6: error: ISO C forbids braced-groups within expressions [-Wpedantic]
    8 |  if (({ i *= 2; puts("doubled");}), i % 2 == 0) {
      |      ^
```

Our recommendation is to always use these options.

:eyes: [compound-statement-invalid.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/compound-statement-invalid.c)

