Class: May 19, 2021

# Work with 3-d array

Declare a 3-d array of 1x2x3 `int`s and statically initialize it with numbers
1..6.  Retype the array as 1-d and print all elements.  You should get then:

```
$ ./a.out
1 2 3 4 5 6
```

No compilation warnings with `gcc -Wall -Wextra` allowed!


# Unions

- similar to structures however have different semantics
	- stores its members in the same memory location
	- allows for different "views" of the same data
- usually combined with structures
- handy for efficient data storage or HW programming

consider this declaration:
```C
union foo {
	unsigned short i; // 2 bytes
	struct {
		unsigned char low;
		unsigned char high;
	} bytes;
};
```
  - the `sizeof(union foo)` will be that of its largest member
  - modify a value of `i` and it will be reflected in the low/high values
    because `i` and `bytes` share the same location

```
		0             high memory addresses
		+-------------+
		|      i      |
		+-------------+
		| low  | high |
                +-------------+
```

- union can be part of a structure, :eyes: [union-in-struct.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-in-struct.c)
  and vice versa :eyes: [struct-in-union.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-in-union.c)
- union can be "anonymous" (e.g. no name inside of a structure), however this is
  non-standard just like for structures

:wrench: Task: use the above declaration to find out if the program is running
on big or little endian system (least significant byte is stored on lowest
address). The program will print either "big endian" or "little endian" to
standard output.

:key: [union-lowhigh.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-lowhigh.c)

# Storage classes

- two classes - *automatic* and *static*
- declaration within a block creates an automatic object.  Its storage is valid
  only within the very same block.
- the storage class determines the lifetime of the storage associated with the
  identified object
- only one storage class specifier may be given in a declaration
- objects declared outside of any block is always of the static storage class
  (e.g. global variables).
- static objects retain their value upon reentry to functions and blocks.
- you can initialize a static object.  The initialization happens just once.

:eyes: [fn-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-static-object.c)

This one also shows how to use `goto`.  More on that later.

:eyes: [block-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/block-static-object.c)

Local variables are implicitly local but you could use the `auto` keyword (noone
does that though):

```C
int
main(void)
{
	auto int i;
}
```

You can also verify that as mentioned above, global variables always in the
static storage class:

```C
$ cat main.c
auto int j;

int main(void)
{
}
$ cc main.c
main.c:1:10: error: illegal storage class on file-scoped variable
auto int j;
         ^
1 error generated.
```

# Static variables and functions

- if a function is declared `static`, it is visible only from the same source
  code file

- static variables: retain value across function calls.  That is, the
  initialization of a static variable within a function is done only once.
- yes, the word `static` is overloaded in C

# Internal vs external linkage

Static objects with the keyword `static` are of internal linkage, meaning they
are not seen from other compilation units.  Static objects without the keyword
`static` are implicitly external.

Use `extern` keyword for objects that are defined in a different compilation
unit.

Example:

	$ cc linkage.c ext.c
	Undefined symbols for architecture x86_64:
	  "_si", referenced from:
	      _main in linkage-917564.o
	ld: symbol(s) not found for architecture x86_64
	clang: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see
	invocation)

:eyes: [linkage.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linkage.c)
:eyes: [ext.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ext.c)

Also note that each object must have exactly one definition.  For objects with
internal linkage, this rule applies separately to each translation unit, because
internally-linked objects are unique to a translation unit.

# Function pointers.

A function name is a pointer to the function.  You can pass it as an argument.

```C
int
myadd(int a, int b)
{
	return (a + b);
}

int
process_numbers(int a, int b, int (*f)(int, int))
{
	return ((*f)(a, b));
}
```

:eyes: [fn-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-ptr.c)

## :wrench: argv sorting

Use `qsort(3)` function to sort `argv`, and print it sorted then.  Check the man
page, you will need to write a function that can compare two elements of the
array you provide to the `qsort()` function.

First use `strcmp()` to sort the argument alphabetically, then use `atoi()` to
sort them numerically.

After that, come up with another way of sorting the arguments and write a
function for it as well.

:key: [argv-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-sort.c)
(for alphabetical sorting only)

# The last initializer and a comma

In C89, having a comma after the last initializer was a syntax error.  Since
C99, it's optional.

```C
struct s {
	int a;
	int b;
} s = { 1, 2, };	// ',' after 2 is optional
```

See why keeping the last comma always there might be a very good idea:
:eyes: [missing-comma-in-initializer.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/missing-comma-in-initializer.c)

# Enumeration constant

We already know integer constants, character and string constants, a
floating-point constant, constant expression (an expression that involves only
constants).

There is one other kind of constant, the *enumeration constant*.  An
*enumeration* is a list of constant integer values, as in:

```C
enum boolean { NO, YES};
```

The first name has value `0`, the next one `1`, etc.  You can use explicit
values as well.  Unspecified values continue to progress from the last value
specified.  For example:

```C
enum months {
	JAN = 1,
	FEB,
	MAR,
	APR,
	MAY,
	JUN,
	JUL,
	AUG,
	SEP,
	OCT,
	NOV,
	DEC,
};
```

You could also do as follows:

```C
enum weird {
	one = 3,
	two,		// 4
	three = 3,
	four = 0,
	five,		// 1
	six,		// 2
	seven = -1,
	...
}
```

The list consists of *enumerators*.  I.e. both `JAN = 1` and `FEB` are
enumerators.  When used in code, `JAN`, `FEB`, `MAR` etc. are enumeration
constants.  The values of enumeration constants must fit an `int`.  However,
the implementation may define any integer type to be compatible with the
enumerated type under the condition that all enumeration constants fit the type.
So, the implementation **might** choose a `char` to be compatible with the `enum
boolean` above.

```C
enum white_space { NL = '\n', SP = ' ', TAB = '\t' };
```

The `sizeof` operator applied on an enum itself tells you the integer type used
(`sizeof (enum weird)`), and `sizeof` on any enumeration constant gives you the
same number.

**Names** in different enumerations must be distinct.  In other words, all
enumerators share the same namespace.  Values in the same enumerations need not
be distinct, e.g.:

```C
enum not_really_useful { GGG = 1, HHH = 1, GHGH = 0 };
```

Example: :eyes: [enums.c](src/enums.c), [enum-values.c](src/enum-values.c)

## Use `enum`s!

This:

```C
enum commands {
	XXX_LIST,
	XXX_EXTRACT,
	XXX_CREATE
}
```

is so much better than this:

```C
#define	XXX_LIST	0
#define	XXX_EXTRACT	1
#define	XXX_CREATE	2
```

The reason is that the enum is known to the compiler and may be included into
debug symbols.  So, when debugging, you might, if the compiler/debugger support
it, see `XXX_LIST` instead of just `0`.  In the latter case, as the compiler
only see the numbers when compiling the code (macros were replaced by numbers in
teh preprocessor phase), you will never see any symbolic names.  So, seeing the
symbols instead of common numbers `0` or `1` is really helping.

# The `const` keyword

`const` is a *qualifier* that may be applied to the declaration of any variable.
It specifies its value cannot be changed.  If you apply `const` to an array, the
array elements cannot be modified.

You can initialize the variable declared with the `const` qualifier.

:eyes: [const.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/const.c)

Using `const` will not really make the storage constant, you just cannot use
that variable for an assignment to the storage.

```C
int i = 'c';
int const *p2 = &i;

// illegal
*p2 = 'x';
// ok
i = 'x';
```

:eyes: [const-not-really-a-const.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/const-not-really-a-const.c)

It also depends where you apply the `const` keyword.

```C
char const *s1;		// s1 is a pointer to const char
const char *s1;		// same as above
char *const s2;		// s2 is a const pointer to a char

*s1 = 'c';		// illegal
s1 = NULL;		// legal

s2 = NULL;		// illegal
*s2 = 'a';		// legal
```

:eyes: [const-and-pointers.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/const-and-pointers.c)

Using `const` can get a bit confusing.  It is mostly used for pointer arguments
to constant memory to specify that an array will not be changed in the function.
For example, string functions:

```C
size_t strlen(const char *s);
char *strncpy(char *dest, const char *src, size_t n);
...
```

:wrench: `const`

The following is a `const` pointer to a `const` character.  So, you can neither
do `*p = ...` nor `p = ...`.  Verify.

```C
const char *const p;
```

# The `typedef` keyword

- note that a `char`, signed and unsigned integer types, and the floating types
  are collectively called *basic types*.
- then you have *derived types* - an array type, a structure, a union, a
  function type, a pointer type.

With `typedef`, you create new data type **names** for **existing** types.  Note
that you **never** create new data **types** with `typedef`.  In other words,
with `typedef`, you create synonyms to existing types.

`typedef` is most commonly used for derived types but many type names provided
by the C standard itself are based on even basic types.  For example, `size_t`,
see its definition in `/usr/include/sys/types.h`.

You can also create new type names using type names you created before, see
below.

`typedef` is used as follows:

```C
typedef int myint;
typedef *char mycharptr;

mycharptr p = "my string";
```

`typedef` is great to create complex type names in small steps.  As we will
see next.

```C
typedef char **array[10];
array a;
```

:eyes: [derived-types.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/derived-types.c)

The convention is to add `_t` to a new type name.  For example:

```C
typedef struct mystruct_s {
	int a;
	char c;
} mystruct_t;
```

And you can use it like this:

```C
struct mystruct_s x;
mystruct_t y;
```

`x` and `y` are of the same type.

:eyes: [typedef.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/typedef.c)

:wrench: Task

Use `typedef` in the warm-up code for the item structure and use the new name
instead of `struct item ...`.


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## Linked list, part II.

(Note: this assignment was given in one of the previous years as the assignment
for the final in-person test with the 90 minute limit).

```C
/*
 * Create a set of functions for manipulating a linked list.  The program
 * accepts input commands as command line arguments and executes them.  New
 * elements are always appended to the list and any item is always removed from
 * the head.  Keep pointers to the first list item (head) and the last one
 * (tail).
 *
 * Commands are: create a list, insert an item, remove an item, and print the
 * list.  It is mandatory to create a list before doing anything else.
 *
 *   create a list:		C
 *   insert an item:		I<nnn>
 *   remove an item:		R
 *   print a list:		P
 *
 * Do reasonable checking for dealing with invalid input.  See below.
 *
 * Example:
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 P R P I6 P I7 P R P R P R P R R R P I88 P R P
 *   List: 1 2 3 4 5
 *   List: 2 3 4 5
 *   List: 2 3 4 5 6
 *   List: 2 3 4 5 6 7
 *   List: 3 4 5 6 7
 *   List: 4 5 6 7
 *   List: 5 6 7
 *   List: EMPTY
 *   List: 88
 *   List: EMPTY
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C R
 *   a.out: Cannot remove an item from an empty list.
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C P
 *   List: EMPTY
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C L
 *   a.out: Wrong command: L
 *
 *   $ ./a.out C C
 *   a.out: List already created, exiting.
 *
 *   $ ./a.out I88
 *   a.out: List not created yet.
 */
```

:eyes: [linked-list.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linked-list.c)

## :wrench: animal sorting

You may remember
[working with an animal structure.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/home-assignments/animals.md)

Use the same structure for this assignment.

:wrench: Task: sort the array by number of legs, print it out to standard
output.

:wrench: Task: sort the array by the animal name. Print it out to standard
output.  Use `strcmp()` to do the comparison of names.

Make the comparison functions static.

Use the standard libc sort function qsort(3).  Check the manual page on how it's
used.  You will need to define a callback function that the qsort() function
will use to compare two array elements.

Make the program to accept an argument (0 or 1) and run the sorting function
based on that.

code:
  - :key: [animal-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal-sort.c)
  - :key: [animals.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animals.h)
  - :key: [animal.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal.h)

