# Bitwise operations

:wrench: Task

Print `argv[1]` in binary (assume it is a correct decimal number).  Note that
`printf`(3) does not have a conversion specifier for it (unlike 'x' for hexa and
'o' for octal).  Limit the input to positive `int`s.  Do not use bit operators
even if you know how to (ie. do NOT use `>>` etc.)

To verify, use bc(1) with `obase=2`.  E.g.:

```
$ bc
obase=2
10
1010
255
11111111
2^31-1
1111111111111111111111111111111

$ ./a.out 2147483647
1111111111111111111111111111111
$ ./a.out 255
11111111
$ ./a.out 348508345
10100110001011101000010111001
```

You can also use `obase=8`, `obase=16`, etc.  Note that bc(1) takes only capital
letters as digits, ie. use "E4" for 0xe4, not "e4".  "e4" is treated as a
variable:

```
$ bc
ibase=16
obase=2
e4
0
E4
11100100
```

:key: [print-in-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/print-in-binary.c)

Bitwise operators are as follows:

Operator | Meaning
--- | ---
`&`	| bitwise AND
`\|`	| bitwise OR
`^`	| bitwise XOR
`<<`	| left shift
`>>`	| right shift
`~`	| one's complement (unary)

Note, individual bits are being processed.  I.e.:

```
316 & 978			-> convert to binary to see it
100111100 & 1111010010		-> do logical AND bit by bit now

0100111100
1111010010
----------
0100010000	== 272 (use ibase=2 with bc(1) to verify)
```

So,

```
((338 & 978) == 272).	// == is of higher prority than &
```

When shifting to the right, it depends on the signedness of the number.
For unsigned values the upper bits are filled with zeroes.
If the number is signed and negative (i.e. starts with bit 1 in two's complement
representation), the behavior is implementation dependent.
Usually the value it is _sign-extended_, i.e. filled with 1's.

:eyes: [left-right-shift.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/left-right-shift.c)

## Common uses of bitwise operators:

```C
n = n & 01777;			// zero out some highest bits

/*
 * Setting individual flags.  Note that each of the flags has
 * just one bit set.
 */
#define	LIGHT_OFF	0x0000
#define	LIGHT_GREEN	0x0001
#define	LIGHT_RED	0x0002
#define	LIGHT_BLUE	0x0004
#define	LIGHT_YELLOW	0x0008
#define	LIGHT_VIOLET	0x0010
#define	LIGHT_WHITE	0x0020
// ...

lights = lights | LIGHT_YELLOW;	// turn on yellow light
lights = lights & ~LIGHT_RED;	// turn off red light
```

## Binary operators and integer promotion

When working with bitwise operators, operands are promoted the same way
as we learned in
[Conversions and promotions](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/arithmetic-promotion-and-conversions.md)

That means:

```
13U & -1				-> promote int (-1) to unsigned,
					   i.e.  promote -1 to unsigned.
					   You get:

13 & 4294967295				-> now convert to binary
1101 & 11111111111111111111111111111111	-> the result clearly is 1101
```

:eyes: [conv-and-prom-with-bitwise-ops.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/conv-and-prom-with-bitwise-ops.c)

:wrench: Task: rewrite `print-in-binary.c` using bitwise operators

:wrench: Task: count 1 bits in a number (`argv[1]`).

```
$ ./a.out 337
4
$ ./a.out 13375
9
```

## :wrench: Warm-up: bit difference

Task: write a program that counts the number of bits that need to be flipped so
      that number A becomes number B.

Note: use the character representation only for debug prints. The actual
      operations with the numbers are to be done with bit operations on
      integers.

Note: consider only positive integers, assume `int`.

:key: [bitdiff.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitdiff.c)

Sub-task for home: flip those bits and verify that the numbers are the same.


# Variable namespace and scope

Identifiers fall into several namespaces that do not interfere with one
another.

These distinct classes are:

- objects, functions, `typedef` constants
- labels
- tags of structures or unions, and enumerations
- members of a structure or union individually

The "individual" part means each structure or union has its own namespace.  So,
you can have two different structures, each using the same member names.

:eyes: [identifier-namespace.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/identifier-namespace.c)


# Reading complex declarations

To read a complex declaration, you use
[operator priorities](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/operator-precedence.md)
and watch for parentheses.

```C
char **argv
```

`argv` is a pointer to a pointer to `char`

```C
int (*a)[10]
```

`a` is a pointer to an array of 10 `int`s

```C
int *a[10]
```

`a` is an array of 10 pointers to `int`

```C
void *myfunc()
```

`myfunc` is a function returning a pointer to `void`

```C
void (*myfunc)()
```

`myfunc` is a pointer to a function returning `void`

```C
char (*(*x())[])()
```

`x` is a function returning pointer to an array of pointers to a function
returning a `char`

```C
char (*(*x[3])())[5]
```

`x` is an array of 3 pointers to a function returning a pointer to an
array of 5 `char`s

## How to read it

1. find the identifier (non keyword or custom type) of a variable or function
2. start decoding:
  - left to right
  - `)`  => reverse decoding direction
  - `()` => denotes function
  - `[]` => array
  - `;`  => reverse the direction
  - when reading from right to left, we can hit:
    - `(`   => reverse the direction
    - `*`   => pointer
    - type identifier => starts the whole definition

Example:
```C
char *(*(**foo[][8])())[];
```

You can mentally simplify as:

```C
char *(*SOME_FUNCTION)[];
```

Where `SOME_FUNCTION` is `(**foo[][8])()`

Read as:

`foo` is an array of arrays of 8 pointers to a pointer to a function
returning a pointer to an array of pointers to a `char`.

Alternatively, you can do it via two simpler steps:

```C
typedef char *a_of_p[];
typedef a_of_p *(**foo[][8])();
```

:eyes: [complex-declaration.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/complex-declaration.c)

:wrench: Practice:

```C
int *(*(*fp1)(int))[10];
char (*(*x())[])()
double *f()[]           // this is not legal in C as a function cannot
                        // return an array
```


# Linking objects

Larger programs are often split into many source code files. One can create the
binary as follows:

```
cc -o binary foo.c bar.c ...
```

and it will work however the files will be compiled every time even though they
were not changed.

To save time the files are usually compiled individually and then linked into
the binary using a _runtime linker_ (sometimes called a _link editor_, or just a
*linker*), a program usually called `ld`. This program also takes care of adding
dependencies on dynamic libraries to the resulting binary.

It works like this (assuming all source code files changed):

```
cc -c foo.c
cc -c bar.c
...
cc -o binary foo.o bar.o ...
```

Do not confuse the runtime linker with *dynamic linker*, usually called
`ld.so`. See its manual page for more information.

Note that the program `ld` was not invoked directly, it is the compiler that
serves as an `ld` wrapper as it needs to add more object files with the C
runtime under the hood. So in reality the compiler accepts some linker options
(and passes them through) to make it easier for the programmer.

For GCC you can use the `-###` option to see what commands would actually be
executed during compilation.  Use `-v` to get the same debugging information but
also execute the commands.

Usually it is desirable to avoid rebuilding objects unnecessarily, especially
when there is a large number of source files. This is usually done via set of
rules that establish dependency. The most common tool for that is `make` and
`Makefile` is its configuration file that drives the compilation.


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## `getbits`()

Implement a function `getbits(x,p,n)` that returns the (right adjusted) `n`-bit
field of `x` that begins at position `p`.  We assume that bit position `0` is at
the right end and that `n` and `p` are sensible positive values.  For example,
`getbits(x,4,3)` returns the three bits in positions 4, 3 and 2, right-adjusted.

The idea is to zero out anything that is to the left of `p`, then shift those
`n` bits to the very right, and you get the result.

```C
/* 1 0000 0000: should return 1 */
i = getbits(0x100, 8, 1);
(void) printf("0x%X\n", i);
assert(i == 1);

/* 1110 0100: should return 9 (1001 in binary) */
i = getbits(0xe4, 5, 4);
(void) printf("0x%X\n", i);
assert(i == 9);

/* 1010 1010: should return the same number, ie. 0xAA */
i = getbits(0xAA, 7, 8);
(void) printf("0x%X\n", i);
assert(i == 0xAA);
```

## Create and traverse path tree

In memory, build a tree of paths, where each node is a path element. The tree
starts with root '/', the non-leaf nodes are directories, the leaves are files.
The three can look e.g. like this:

```
	 "/"
       /  |   \
      /   |     \
  "foo/" "f.txt"  "bar/"
  /   \
"a.c" "b.c"
```

Populate the tree with given paths and print the leaves (no particular order),
one per line.  Then free the allocated memory.

Each node can have constant number of children.

Possible input:
```C
	char *paths[] = { "/beverages/coffee/espresso.java",
			"/beverages/alcohol/beer.c",
			"/food/healthy/vegetarian/salad.txt",
			"/food/healthy/fruit/blueberries.hs",
			"/food/unhealthy/cake.md" };
```

:key: [dirtree.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/dirtree.c)

bonus tasks:
  - print also non-leaf nodes via depth first, with each node indented based on
    its tree depth.  E.g:

```
    $ ./a.out
    /
    	foo/
		a.c
		b.c
	f.txt
	bar/
```

  - remove the limitation for the constant number of children
  - print full paths of all files in the tree (hint: backpointers)

