Topics: strlen, ternary operator, arithmetic type conversions, negative numbers,
integer overflows, compiler warning options

## :wrench: toupper

rewrite the
[convert small characters to upper case](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/toupper.md)
program using a function.

:key: [toupper.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/toupper.c)

### implementation notes

  - there is a `toupper()` library function from C99 so use `mytoupper()`
    - what happens if the program defines `int toupper(int)` ? (the symbol in `libc` is *weak* so it works)

### variant: do this via lookup table - array

   - generate array indexed by `a`..`z` (with corresponding values `A`..`Z`) in `main()` and use the array in the `mytoupper()` function
   - arrays passed as function argument are in reality converted to pointers
     (to be introduced later)
     - so it is useless to write their size like this:
```C
         void func(int array[3]); // see what is the value of sizeof(array) inside the func()
```
- this is better:
```C
         void func(int array[], size_t size);
```
  - also, if the items in the array are changed in the function,
         they will be changed in the array itself (consequence of pointer
         conversion)

  - what happens if `mytoupper(-1)` ?
  - `short` is sufficient to store the value:
```C
    short uppper[] = { 'A', 'B', ... };
```

:key: [toupper-table.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/toupper-table.c)


# String length

We know that we can use `sizeof` to get a length of a character array including
the terminating `'\0'` character.  There is a more general way to get a string
length, function `strlen`().  Note that when we know what pointers are, the
existence of the fuction will make more sense.

The function is declared in `<string.h>` and returns a value of type `size_t`,
that is the same type as the operator `sizeof` uses.  So, remember to use the
`z` modifier to the `%u` conversion specifier:

```C
#include <string.h>

char s[] = "hello, world";

printf("Length of \"%s\": %zu\n", s, strlen(s));
```

Note that to include a literal `"` in a string, you just escape it.

## Checking empty string

`strlen()` can be used to check if string is empty, however if not, it will
incur performance penalty as it has to go through all the characters.

Thus, it is better to check just the first character - if it is `\0` then
the string is empty.

:eyes: [string-isempty.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/string-isempty.c)

# More on functions/arrays

## variable length array (VLA)
- automatically allocated based on a variable value.  Only for local variables,
  not globals. Same warning applies w.r.t. array size and stack growth as with
  fixed width arrays.

```C
	void fn(int n, int m)
	{
	    int a[n + m];
	    ...
	}
```
- :eyes: [array-variable-length.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-variable-length.c)

- :heavy\_exclamation\_mark: note that it generates more code which might be
  avoided with a choosing a reasonable constant, if possible.  Also see [a rant
  from Linus](https://lkml.org/lkml/2018/3/7/621).

## K&R

history: you may still see in very old code: K&R definition with types of
arguments on separate line(s):

```C
int
foo(a, b)
int a; int b;
{
      /* body */
}
```

Some compilers have dropped the support for K&R definitions or will drop soon.

## Variable shadowing

- every identifier has its *scope*

- the scope of a name is the part of the program within which the name can be
  used.

- for example, we can declare a variable `int i` in the `main` function, and as
  well as in another function.  Those two variables reference different storage.

- for now, we only care about two types of scope - a file, and a block.

- when declaring a variable within the outer block of the function, its scope is
  from the variable declaration to the end of the function block.

- note that a block is used in multiple constructs in C, e.g. `while`, `for`,
  etc.

- :eyes: [shadow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow.c)
:eyes: [shadow-block.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow-block.c)

## Function is not object

Like an array, function is not a first class object (i.e. no "functor" like in
functional languages).

  - that said, there are pointers to functions (more on these later)

# Functions with variable number of arguments

- functions can have variable number of arguments of different types (more on
  that later)
    - the three dots is called *ellipsis*
```C
void func(fmt, ...);
```

- the first argument usually describes the rest of arguments in some way
  - usually it is a format string.  It could possibly be an argument count if
    they were of the same type however in that case they would probably be
    passed as an pointer (we will get to pointers in a later class).


:wrench: write a function that takes variable number of `ULL` arguments
  and returns their sum

- use the stdarg(3) man page
- what happens if there is one `int` value passed in between the `ULL`
  arguments ?

:key: [stdarg.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/stdarg.c)

# Ternary operator

```
    cond ? expr1 : expr 2
```
same as
```
    if (cond) expr else expr2
```
e.g.
```
    max = (i > j) ? i : j;
```
note that if we add a semicolon, an expression becomes a statement, e.g.:
```
      (i == j) ? i++ : j++;
```
will increment i or j. the parens are not needed but generally
used for better readability.

code: :eyes: [ternary-assign.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ternary-assign.c)

## :wrench: toupper using ternary operator

rewrite the
[convert small characters to upper case](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/toupper.md)
program from last time using a function that utilizes the ternary operator
(single line of code)

:key: [toupper-ternary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/toupper-ternary.c)

## :wrench: min/max of 3 integer values

write an expression that returns maximum of 3 integers `i`, `j`, `k` using
ternary operator

  - do not use any macros

:key: [3max.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/3max.c)

## :wrench: quiz

see the code in :eyes: [ternary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ternary.c)

  - is this possible to do with ternary operator ?
  - how would you fix it ?
  - the usual solution is to put this into macro. many libraries/programs
    define their own `MAX`/`MIN` macros.

# Arithmetic type conversions

In (very) general, if *binary* operators have operands of different types, the
"lower" is promoted to "upper".  Eg. if one operand is a `long double`, the
other operand is promoted to a `long double`.

What is more, in most operations (for every operator, the spec says what is
done in this respect), `char` and `short` int operands are converted to `int`s,
and to `unsigned int`s if they do not fit in an `int`.  That conversion is
called *integer promotion*.  This is done to make the language runtime fast (on
x86 32-bit arithmetics can be much faster than when using 16-bit operands).

*Most operations* means all binary operators.  A ternary operator as well.  And
even some unary operators.

`sizeof (1)` is 4 because 1 is an `int`.  However, if a number does not fit to an
`int`, a higher type will be used.  For example, 4294967296 (2^32) will be stored
in 8 bytes, and `sizeof (4294967296)` is 8.

Does it sound confusing?  Do not worry, we will give you specific rules later.

:wrench: verify that numbers that do not fit in an `int` will have a size of 8
bytes.

## Examples

Aassuming `char c;` declaration:
- `sizeof (999)` is 4 as "999" is an integer by definition.
- `sizeof (c)` is 1
- `sizeof (c + c)` is 4 as `+` is a binary operator and the integer promotion
  kicks in
- `sizeof (++c)` is still 1 as `++` is an unary operator for which the integer
  promotion rules do not apply.
- `sizeof (+c)` is 4 as for unary `+` and `-`, the integer promotion is applied.
  - You just need to know or check the spec if you do not remember.  Most
    of the time it does not matter but do not fool yourself, if you do not
    know details like that in C, it will bite you sooner or later.
  - remember [A Case Study of Toyota Unintended Acceleration and Software
    Safety](https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/pubs/koopman14_toyota_ua_slides.pdf)
    from the [first class](/modules/intro.md)
- `sizeof (1LL)` will usually be 8 as `long long` is usually 8 bytes.

It gets more interesting if unsigned and signed numbers are involved.  Eg. a
`signed int` is promoted to an `unsigned int` if one of the operands is
unsigned.

The above is called *implicit type conversion*.  There is also *explicit type
conversion* (called *casting*) which we will deal with later.

I suggest you try these out with `printf("%zu", ...)`.  `%zu` (see "man 3
printf") matches the return type of the `sizeof` operand.  The exact unsigned
numeric type of what `sizeof` returns may differ in different implementations so
`%zu` will work anywhere.

# Negative numbers

Negative numbers are usually stored in [two's complement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two's_complement)
(however, that is implementation defined by the standard).

In short, you take an absolute value, create one's complement
(inverting the digits in binary representation) and add 1.  There
are several advantages of this representation, one is that there is only 1 zero 
(not negative and positive zero if we used the highest bit to track the sign).  
That is why a `signed char`, for example, can hold -128 to 127,
and not just -127 to 127.

For a `char`:
```
 10000000	-128
 ........
 11111101	  -3
 11111110	  -2      ^
 11111111	  -1      |
 --------------------------
 00000000	   0      |
 00000001	   1      v
 00000010	   2
 ........
 01111111	 127
```

On Unix systems the shell reports the -1 return value as 255 in `echo $?`.  Even
though the `main()` returns integer (4 bytes), the shell takes just low 8 bits
and interprets them as unsigned quantity.

:eyes: [return-1.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/return-1.c)

If long is 8 bytes, and an int 4, then `-1L < 1U` as you might expect.

However, `-1 > 1U` because -1 is promoted to unsigned.  Two's complement
representation of -1 is (see the paragraph above):
```
(1) take absolute value of 1	00000000.00000000.00000000.00000001
(2) one's complement		11111111.11111111.11111111.11111110
(3) add 1 to get 2's complement	11111111.11111111.11111111.11111111
```
which is 2^32 - 1 when interpreted as unsigned quantity.

Just `printf("%u\n", -1)` to see it will print 4294967295 (use the unix/linux
`bc` command and type `2^32-1` to verify).

:eyes: [signed-plus-unsigned.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/signed-plus-unsigned.c)
:eyes: [signed-to-unsigned.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/signed-to-unsigned.c)

The assymetry of the negative/positive interval can lead to the program crashing
on architectures that detect it. This is consequence of hardware handling rather
than the language.

  code: :eyes: [crashme.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/crashme.c)
    - run with `-INT_MIN` (see limits.h) and -1.  `INT_MIN` is usually
      -2147483648.
    - works in 64-bit mode as well due to int being passed in 32-bit registers

```
	$ cc -m64 crashme.c
	$ ./a.out 2147483648 -1
	-2147483648 -1
	Floating point exception: 8
	$ echo $?
	136
	$ kill -l 136
	FPE

	$ cc -m32 crashme.c
	$ ./a.out 2147483648 -1
	2147483647 -1
	$
```

## :wrench: Quiz 1

- what is the result if `0xff` `signed char` and `0xff` `unsigned char` are
  compared using the `==` operator ?
  - write down the hexadecimal representation of the integers corresponding to
    the 2 chars with `printf()`

:eyes: [int-promotion.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/int-promotion.c)
      - note that if the `b` character was defined as `char b` the result might be 1
        because it is up to the compiler to choose whether char will be signed
	or unsigned.  Usually it is signed though. There are compiler options to
	specify this, e.g. GCC has `-funsigned-char` and `-fsigned-char`

## :wrench: Quiz 2

Will the program print the whole array ?
  - try to come up with reason of the expected behavior before running the
    program.

:eyes: [whole-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/whole-array.c)

# Function arguments

Say, what happens if you put a `char` as an argument of a function that accepts
an `int`?  As you might expect, the byte is just assigned to an `int`.

In general, the expressions passes as arguments are first evaluated, then the
value of the resulted type is converted to the parameter type as in assignment.

More on that later.  For more information, see 6.9.1 in
[C99](/modules/c99-standard.md)

# Compiler warnings

- each compiler has its own set of warnings that usually give a clue that
  something strange and potentially harmful can happen.
  - there are differences between various compilers
  - will focus on GCC here
  - during the old days the tool producing these warnings was called 'lint'
    that had to be run separately

  - the basic: `-Wall -Wextra`
    - `-Wall` catches things like missing return value from a function that
      should return one

      code: :eyes: [no-return.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/no-return.c)

    - there are many places where a beginner can shoot himself into a foot
      by not knowing the language intricacies.
      - e.g. variable cannot be modified more than once between sequencing
	points. The `-Wsequence-point` that is included in `-Wall` warns about
	that

      code: :eyes: [sequence-point-violation.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/sequence-point-violation.c)

  - the `-Wshadow` can catch shadow variables overriding:

    code: :eyes: [shadow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow.c)
    :eyes: [shadow-block.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shadow-block.c)

  - all or specific warnings can be turned into errors: `-Werrror` or
    `-Werror=<insert_specific_error>` , respectively
    - unless the warnings contain false positives (and those can usually be
      suppressed) this will help to avoid troubles later

  - there are other means to check for correctness (static/dynamic analysis),
    more on those later

## :wrench: Use the options

Go through the programs written so far and run the compiler using the
  `-Wall -Wextra` options.
  - what kind of problems did you discover ? how to fix them ?
    - see e.g. :eyes: [whole-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/whole-array.c)
      example above (where only `-Wextra` gives some clue)

Explore the compiler documentation for more helpful options.
Over the time you will find a set of warning options that will serve you well.

# Integer overflow

- what happens if `int` overflows ?
  - the behavior of overflow depends on whether the type is signed or unsigned
    - for signed types the behavior is undefined!  I.e. you cannot rely on
      overflow of a positive quantity in a signed int will be turned into
      a negative number.  Some compilers will allow to specify the behavior of
      signed overflows using special options (`-fwrapv` for GCC), though.
    - for unsigned, an overflow always wraps around (modulo power of 2) and is a
      defined behavior.

  code: :eyes: [int-overflow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/int-overflow.c)
  :eyes: [unsigned-overflow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/unsigned-overflow.c)

    - use `-fstrict-overflow -Wstrict-overflow` (will become active only for
      higher optimization levels, i.e. `-O<X>` where `X > 1`) to stay on the
      safe side


# Home assignments :wrench:

## Conway 1D

write a 1-D implementation of [Conway's game of life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life)
  - use [rule 30](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Rule30.html) to determine the next
  - use two arrays (one 2-D and one 1-D) to represent the rules and its
    resulting values
    - there are 8 rules, each has 3 values to compare against and one result
  - we now have the arsenal to write 2-D variant however to display 2-D
    world some way to refresh the terminal would be needed so we will stick
    with 1-D.
    - use `\r` to reset the line between iterations
    - sleep for 1 second between iterations (`unistd.h` is needed for that)
  - each life "tick" will print the line representing the world
  - use functions to refactor the code
  - once having a working solution, try to rewrite it to be more efficient
    or elegant (or both)

## byte count to human readable string

 write function to convert `uint64_t` to human readable count
  (binary - see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orders_of_magnitude_(data) or
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mebibyte, e.g. MiB as mebibyte, etc.) and print
  it to standard output

```C
  void bytecnt2str(uint64_t num);
```

  - use character array to represent the magnitude letters and perform
    the lookup based on the actual magnitude
  - if there is a remainder, write a '+' following the number
  - write the output in single `printf()` (use [ternary operator](/modules/ternary-operator.md) for the remainder)

  - example inputs/outputs:
```
1024		1 KiB
1025		1+ KiB
2047		1+ KiB
2048		2 KiB
2049		2+ KiB
5242880		5 MiB
```
  solution: [bytecnt2str.c](src/bytecnt2str.c)


## Offset checker

write a function that has the following prototype:

```C
  bool check(long off, size_t size, size_t limit);
```
  - checks if the arguments are valid for accessing part of a file (no
    operations will be done, just the check) of size 'size' starting from an
    offset 'off'. The length of the file is given by the 'limit' argument.
  - an offset may be negative

```
    |           |         |              |
    0          off     off+size        limit
```

  - try to capture all corner cases of what could go wrong with the values
    and return `false` on failure, `true` on success.

  solution: :eyes: [range-check.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/range-check.c)

  - on Unix systems one would use `ssize_t` for the offset which is a signed
    integer type of the same size as `size_t` (this is not part of C99 but
    POSIX)

  - also, implement a set of test values in `main()` using an array

