# Strings and String Constants

We already know what a
[string](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/string.md)
is.  It is an array of non-null characters terminated by a null byte.

- `"xxx"` is called a *string literal* or a *string constant*

	- do not confuse it with a *character constant*, e.g. `'A'`, as it uses
	  single quotes.  In contrast to Python, for example, single and double
	  quotes are two different things in C.

- **a string constant internally initializes an array of characters, with a null
  character appended.**

- we already know that a *string* is a contiguous sequence of characters
  terminated by and including the first null character

	- so, a string literal may include multiple null characters, thus
	  defining multiple strings.  In other words, a *string literal* and a
	  *string* are two different things.

```C
$ cat main.c
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
	printf("%s\n", "hello\0world.");
}
$ cc main.c
$ ./a.out
hello
```

- a string constant may be used to initialize a char array and usually that is
  how the string initialization is used (in contrast to `{ 'a', 'b', ... }`)

```C
int
main(void)
{
	char s[] = "hello, world.";

	printf("%s\n", s);
}
```

```
$ gcc -Wall -Wextra main.c
$ ./a.out
hello, world.
```

- note that `'\0'` is just a special case of octal representation `'\ooo'`,
  called *octal escape sequence*, where `o` is an octal figure (0-7).  You can
  use any ASCII character like that.

	- the full syntax is `'\o'`, `'\oo'`, or `'\ooo'` 

```C
$ cat main.c
#include <stdio.h>

int
main(void)
{
	/* Check the ascii manual page that 132 is 'Z', and 71 is '9'. */
	printf("%c\n", '\132');
	printf("%c\n", '\71');
}
$ ./a.out
Z
9
```

- remember that if `{}` is used for the initialization, **you must add the
  terminating zero yourself** unless you use the size of the array and the
  string was shorter (in which case the rest would be initialized to zero as
  usual):

```C
char s[] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0' };
```

- so, the following is still a propertly terminated string but do not use it
  like that

```C
char s[10] = { 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o' };
```

Anyway, you would probably never do it this way.  Just use `= "hello"`.

:eyes: [array-fill.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-fill.c)
:eyes: [array-fill2.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/array-fill2.c)

- string is printed via `printf()` as `%s`

```C
printf("%s\n", "hello, world");
```

- experiment with what `%5s` and `%.5s` do (use any reasonable number)

:eyes: [string-format.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/string-format.c)

# Warm-up

- :wrench: extend the program :eyes: [tr-d-chars.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/tr-d-chars.c)
  from last time to translate character input, e.g.
```
tail /etc/passwd | tr 'abcdefgh' '123#'
```
  - use character arrays defined with string literals to represent the 2 strings
    - see the tr(1) man page on what needs to happen if the 1st string is longer
      than the 2nd
      - do not store the expanded 2nd string as literal in your program !
        (i.e. not `123#####`)

:key: [tr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/tr.c)

:wrench: (bonus): refactor the code into a function(s)

- remember that arrays are passed into a function as a pointer (to be explained
  soon, not needed now) which can be used inside the function with an array
  subscript.

# The `for` loop

Formally defined as:

```
for (<init>; <predicate>; <update>)
	<body>
```

It is the same as:

```
<init>
while (<predicate>) {
	<body>
	<update>
}
```

Using the for loop is very often easier and more readable.

Example:
```C
int i;
for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i) {
	printf("%d\n", i);
}
```

Or in C99:

```C
for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i) {
	printf("%d\n", i);
}
```

- the `break` statement terminates execution of the loop (i.e. it jumps right
  **after** the enclosing `}`)

- with the `continue` statement, the execution jumps to the end of the loop body
  (i.e. it jumps **at** the enclosing `}`).  That means the execution continues
  with the `<predicate>` test.

- both `break` and `continue` statements relate to the smallest enclosing loop
  they are executed in

:eyes: [for.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/for.c)

:wrench: task: compute minimum of averages of lines in 2-D integer array (of
arbitrary dimensions) that have positive values (if there is negative value in
given line, do not use the line for computation).

:eyes: [2darray-min-avg.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/2darray-min-avg.c)

# Expressions

> "In mathematics, an expression or mathematical expression is a finite
combination of symbols that is well-formed according to rules that depend on
the context."

In C, expressions are, amongst others, variables, constants, strings, and
expressions in parentheses.  Also arithmetic expressions, relational
expressions, function calls, sizeof, assignments, and ternary expressions.

http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/expressions

In C99, an expression can produce results (2+2 gets 4) or generate side effects
(`printf("foo")` sends a string literal to the standard output).

:eyes: [expression-statement.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/expression-statement.c)

:wrench: task: make the warning an error with your choice of compiler (would be
a variant of `-W` in GCC)

# Statements

Statements are (only from what we already learned), expressions, selections
(`if`, `switch` (not introduced yet)), `{}` blocks (known as *compounds*),
iterations, and jumps (`goto` (not introduced yet), `continue`, `break`,
`return`).

http://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/statements

Basically, statements are pieces of code executed in sequence. The function body
is a compound statement. The compound statement (a.k.a. *block*) is a sequence
of statements and declarations.  Blocks can be nested.  Blocks inside a function
body are good for variable reuse.

A semicolon is not used after a compound statement but it is allowed.  The
following is valid code then:

```C
int
main(void)
{
	{ }
	{ };
}
```

**A declaration is not a statement** (there are subtle consequences, we can show
them later).

Some statements must end with `;`.  For example, expression statements.  The
following are all valid expression statements.  They do not make much sense
though and may generate a warning about an unused result.

```C
/* this one is not a statement */
char c;

/* these are all expression statements */
c;
1 + 1;
1000;
"hello";
```

:eyes: [null-statement.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/null-statement.c)
:eyes: [compound-statement.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/compound-statement.c)

## w.r.t. compound statement vs. expression:

- It is not allowed to have a compound statement within an expression.
  - That said, GCC has a language extension (gcc99) that can be used to allow
    this - the reason is for protecting multiple evaluation within macros.
  - The C99 standard does not define it.
  - gotcha: the following code has to be compiled with `gcc` with the
    `-pedantic-errors` option in order to reveal the problem

```
gcc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic-errors compound-statement-invalid.c

compound-statement-invalid.c: In function ‘main’:
compound-statement-invalid.c:8:6: error: ISO C forbids braced-groups within expressions [-Wpedantic]
    8 |  if (({ i *= 2; puts("doubled");}), i % 2 == 0) {
      |      ^
```

Our recommendation is to always use these options.

:eyes: [compound-statement-invalid.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/compound-statement-invalid.c)

# Pointers

Motivation:

- memory allocation / shared memory
- protocol buffer parsing
- pointer arithmetics

- the value stored in a pointer variable is the address of the memory storing
  the given pointer type
- declared like this, e.g.

```C
int *p; // pointer to an int
```

- note on style:

```C
int * p;
int *p;  // preferred in this lecture
```

- a pointer is always associated with a type

- to access the object the pointer points to, use a *dereference* operator `*`:

```C
printf("%d", *p);
```

- the dereference is also used to write a value to the variable pointed:

```C
*p = 5;
```

- in a declaration, you may assign like this:

```C
int i = 5;
int *p = &i;
```

- good practice is to prefix pointers with the 'p' letter, e.g.:

```C
int val;
int *pval = &val;
```

- the `&` is an *address-of* operator and gets the address of the variable (i.e.
  the memory address of where the value is stored)

- the pointer itself is obviously stored in memory too (it's just another
  variable).  With the declarations above, it looks as follows:

```
     p
     +---------------+
     |     addr2     |
     +---------------+        i
     ^                        +-------+
     |                        | 5     |
   addr1                      +-------+
                              ^
                              |
                            addr2
```

- the size of the pointer depends on the architecture and the way the program
  was compiled (see `-m32` / `-m64` command line switches of gcc)

- `sizeof (p)` will return the amount of memory to store the address of the
  object the pointer points to
- `sizeof (*p)` will return the amount needed to store the object the pointer
  points to

:wrench: write a program to print:

   - address of the pointer
   - the address where it points to
   - the value of the pointed to variable

Use the `%p` formatting for the first two.

:key: [ptr-basics.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-basics.c)

## Null pointer

- the real danger with pointers is that invalid memory access results in a crash
  (the program is terminated by kernel)
- can assign a number directly to a pointer (that should trigger a warning
  though.  We will get to casting and how to fix that later).

```C
int *p = 0x1234;
```

- zero pointer value is called *a null pointer constant* and is defined as
  a macro `NULL`
[in the C specification.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/c99-standard.md)
  `NULL` is converted to a *null pointer* which is guaranteed in C not to point
  to any object or function.  In other words, dereferencing a null pointer is
  guaranteed to terminate the program.

	- this is because zero address is left unmapped on purpose, or a page
	  that cannot be accessed maps to the address.

	- the C specification says that the macro `NULL` must be defined in
	  `<stddef.h>`

:wrench: create the null pointer and try to read from it / write to it

:key: [null-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/null-ptr.c)

## Basic operations

- notice the difference:

```C
int i;
int *p = &i;
```

vs.

```C
int i;
int *p;

// set value of the pointer (i.e. the address where it points to).
p = &i;
```

- operator precedence gotcha:
```C
*p		// value of the pointed to variable
*p + 1		// the value + 1
*(p + 1)	// the value on the address + 1 (see below for what it means)
```
- note that the & reference operator is possible to use only on variables
  - thus this is invalid:

```C
p = &(i + 1);
```

- store value to the address pointed to by the pointer:

```C
*p = 1;
```

## Changing pointers:

Pointers can be moved forward and backward

```C
p = p + 1;
p++;
p--;
```

**The pointer is moved by the amount of underlying data type when using
arithmetics.**

:wrench: create a pointer to an `int`, print it out, create a new pointer
that points to `p + 1`. See what is the difference between the 2 pointers.

:key: [ptr-diff.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ptr-diff.c)

## Operator gotchas

- `*` has bigger precedence than `+` so:

```C
i = *p + 1;
```

is equal to

```C
i = (*p) + 1;
```

- postfix `++` has higher precedence than `*`:

```C
i = *p++;
```

is evaluated as `*(p++)` but it still does this
```C
i = *p; p++;
```

  - because `++` is used in postfix mode, ie. the value of expression `p++` is `p`:

# File API

Part of the standard since C90.

## Opening/closing

- `fopen` opens a file and returns an opaque handle (pointer)
  - getting `NULL` means an error
  - the `mode` argument controls the behavior: read, write, append
    - the `+` adds the other mode (write for read and vice versa, read for append)
  - write mode creates the file if it does not exist
  - the `b` binary mode usually does not have any effect (see
[the standard)](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/c99-standard.md)
- `fclose` closes the handle
  - important to avoid resource leak (`fopen` can allocate both memory and file
    descriptor)
- `freopen` can be used to associate the standard streams (`stderr`, `stdin`, or
  `stdout`) with a file

:wrench: write a code that opens the same file in an cycle (until `fopen()`
fails) without calling `fclose()` on the handle. After how many iterations does
it fail on your system?

:eyes: [fopen-leak.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fopen-leak.c)

## I/O

- `fprintf` - `printf` to a stream
- `fscanf`
  - basically parses text input from a stream according to format string
  - except the format string all the parameters must be pointers
- `fputs`/`fgets` - send/read string to/from a stream
- `fputc`/`fgetc` - send/read `char` to/from a stream
- `fwrite`/`fread` - for writing/reading binary data (such as structures or raw
  numeric types)

## Seeking

When reading/writing to a file using the above function, the current position
changes accordingly.  However, the position can be manipulated without
performing any I/O.

- `fseek` - moves the position
  - the `whence` parameter has 3 possible values and makes the `offset`
    parameter relative to:
    - `SEEK_SET` - the beginning of the file
    - `SEEK_END` - the end of the file
    - `SEEK_CUR` - the current location of the cursor in the file
- `ftell` - get current position in the file

# `err`() family of functions

- not defined by any standard however handy
- present in BSD, glibc (= Linux distros), Solaris, macOS, etc.
- use the `<err.h>` include, see the err(3) man page
- this is especially handy when working with I/O
- instead of writing:

```C
if (error) {
	fprintf(stderr, "error occured: %s\n", strerror(errno));
	exit(1);
}
```

- write the following

```C
if (error)
     err(1, "error occured: ");
```

- notice that a newline is inserted automatically at the end of the error
  message.
- or for functions that do not modify the `errno` value, use the *x* variant:

```C
if (some_error)
	errx(1, "ERROR: %d", some_error);
```

- there's also `warn()`/`warnx()` that do not exit the program


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## File of integers

:wrench: get a file size using the standard IO API (that is, `lseek(2)` is
prohibited even if you know it).

:wrench: create array of `int` values (of arbitrary positive length with values
ranging from `INT_MAX` to `0`), write the array to a file, read the values
into another array and print them to the standard error.
Between the writing and reading the file handle has to remain open. Use the
same file handle for reading and writing.
Use `od(1)` to verify the content of the file (thus it is handy to start with
`INT_MAX` and e.g. divide by 2 for each successive value).

:key: [fopen-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fopen-binary.c)

:wrench: use the file created by the previous program. Read the values from the
end of the file to the beginning of the file one by one without knowing the file
size and print the numbers to the standard error output.

## File read

:wrench: create a text file where each line begins with integer followed
by space and a string, e.g.:
```
42 towel
13 dwarfs and Snow White
```
Read the file using `fscanf()` and print the values (i.e. integer and a string)
from each line to standard output.

