# :wrench: warm-up: implement strcmp()

Implement

```C
    int strcmp(const char *s1, const char *s2);
```

returns (according to the strcmp(3) manual page)
> an integer greater than, equal to, or less than 0, according as the
> string s1 is greater than, equal to, or less than the string s2.

:key: [strcmp.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/strcmp.c)

:wrench: compare your solution with the above. Try to reimplement
it so that it is as smallest (in terms of
[Lines Of Code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Source_lines_of_code))
as possible.

# Program arguments

```C
int main(int argc, char *argv[]);
```

  - `argv` is declared as an array of pointers
    - i.e. `argv[i]` is a pointer to `char`
  - the arguments of `main()` can have arbitrary names however please stick
    to the convention to avoid confusion of those who might be reading your
    program

  - `argc` is a number of command line arguments, including the command name
    itself (in `argv[0]`).

  - `argv[i]` are arguments as strings.  Note, they are **strings** even if you
    put numbers there on the command line.

  - `argv[argc]` is a null pointer by definition.

Note: remember (see
[notes about array passed to function](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/arrays-as-function-arguments.md)
) that in a function argument, an array is
      always treated as a pointer so the above effectively becomes:
```C
        int main(int argc, char **argv);
```
  i.e. in this context, char `*argv[]` and char `**argv` are the same.

  The declaration merely hints at the memory layout.

Also, you already know that you can use an array notation with strings as
well, so you could use `argv[i][j]` to print individual characters.  Just make
sure that it's not out of range.

:eyes: [argv-as-2d-array.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-as-2d-array.c)


- the memory for `argc`, `argv` is allocated before `main()` is called
  - the standard (C99) leaves unspecified where argc/argv are stored

    > section 5.1.2.2.1: the strings pointed to by the argv array shall be
    modifiable by the program, and retain their last-stored values between
    program startup and program termination.

- the `argv` is array of pointers to null-terminated strings and must be
  terminated by a null pointer. (quote from the execve(2) man page)

```
  argv
  +-----------+
  |           |---------->+--------------+
  +-----------+           |              |---->+---+---+---+---+----+
                          +--------------+     | p | r | o | g | \0 |
                          |              |-\   +---+---+---+---+----+
  argc                    +--------------+  \
  +----------+            |              |-  \->+---+---+---+----+
  |    3     |            +--------------+ \    | f | o | o | \0 |
  +----------+            |     NULL     |  \   +---+---+---+----+
                          +--------------+   \
                                              ->+---+---+---+----+
                                                | b | a | r | \0 |
						+---+---+---+----+
```

## :wrench: Task: print command line arguments

  - print all command line arguments using `argc`
  - print all command line arguments using just `argv`
  - print all command line arguments not starting with `-`
  - print all command line arguments using a recursive function (that accepts
    pointer to pointer to char)

Note: for all arguments print their address as well

Note: do not print the terminating null pointer entry
  - some `printf()` implementations barf on null pointer when printing via the
    `%s` format string

Code:
  - :key: [argv-while.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-while.c)
  - :key: [argv-for.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-for.c)
  - :key: [argv-nodash.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-nodash.c)
  - :key: [print-argv-recursively.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/print-argv-recursively.c)

## :wrench: Task: get char distance in specific argument

write a program with usage `./a.out <a> <b> <string>` to
find a distance (number of characters) between the first occurence of character
`<a>` and `<b>` in a string `<string>`.
If either of the character is not found in the string, print an error.
```
./a.out a x "ahello xworld"
7
```
Note: do not use `strchr()` or the like.

:key: [argv-char-dist.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-char-dist.c)

## usage: semi-formal specification of program arguments

  - usually used to print when invalid option or arguments are specified
  - can be handled via `errx()`
  - the usage usually contains program name followed by the argument schema
    - see e.g. the nc(1) man page
  - optional arguments are enclosed in square brackets, mandatory arguments
    are enclosed in `<>` or left without brackets

:wrench: write a program that takes 1 or 2 arguments. If run with any other
count, print usage and exit.

:key: [usage.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/usage.c)

## :wrench: Task: print the n-th character of the r-th argument (count from 0)

usage: `./a.out <r> <n> [args]`

do not count `argv[0] .. arg[2]`.  If not enough arguments or the argument is
not long enough, print a helpful message.  Only use pointer arithmetics, do
**not** use square brackets (ie.  `argv[i][j]` is **not** allowed).

```
./a.out 2 3 hey hi world
l
```
Note: use `atoi()` to convert the first 2 arguments to integers

:key: [argv-nr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-nr.c)

## :wrench: Task: what do these programs do when run with 2 arguments

Assume that the arguments are sufficiently long enough.

Skipping ahead: prefix `++` and dereference operator have the same precedence
so they are evaluated based on associativity which is right-to-left.

```C
int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	printf("%s\n", ++*++argv);
}

int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	printf("%s\n", argv[1]);
	printf("%s\n", ++*++argv);
	printf("%s\n", argv[0]);
	printf("%s\n", ++*++argv);
	printf("%s\n", argv[0]);
}

int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	printf("%s\n", *++*++argv);
}
```

Note: the last function might not compile with smarter compilers (such as LLVM)
that include format string checks.  What is expected to happen if the last piece
of code does compile and is run with one argument?

Code:
  - :eyes: [plus-deref-plus-argv.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/plus-deref-plus-argv.c)
  - :eyes: [plus-deref-plus-deref-argv.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/plus-deref-plus-deref-argv.c)

# Structures

## Basics

- collection of one or more members, possibly of different types, grouped
  together under a single name

- is one of the two *aggregate types* (the other aggregate type is the *array*)

- structures permit group of related members to be treated as a unit (precursor
  to a class in Object Oriented Programming)

- structures can contain other structures

- structure is specified as:

```C
struct foo {
	... // members
};
```

e.g.

```C
struct foo {
	int a;
	char b;
};
```
- any type can be a member of a structure that it not incomplete and not a
  function
  - that means a structure may not contain itself (before the structure
    definition is finished with the terminating `}` it is an incomplete type as
    its size is not yet known)
    - there is a minor exception though, see C99 6.7.2.1, paragraph 2 and 16,
      and also a
[*flexible array member*.](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/flexible-array-member.md)
  - however: a pointer to its own type is possible (remember, a pointer
    is just a number referencing a piece of memory, and its size is known)
  - unlike in C++, structure cannot contain functions. It may contain
    pointers to functions, though.
- structure does not need a name, :eyes: [struct-unnamed.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-unnamed.c)
  - however then its use is limited to a variable declaration
  - one can even have an "anonymous structure", however that is a C11
    extension, :eyes: [struct-anon.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-anon.c)

- the `struct` declaration itself cannot contain initializers.  However, the
  structure can be initialized with a list of initializers in the same way as
  arrays.

  So, you cannot do:

```C
struct foo {
	int a;
} = { 1 };
```

- when the structure has been defined, you can declare a variable of its type:

```C
struct foo f;
```

- sometimes the `_s` postfix is used to denote a structure name

 Note: the `struct` keyword has to be used for its definition and declaration:

`foo f;` is not valid.

- can declare structure and its variables at the same time, and you can also
  initialize it at the same time:

```C
struct foo_s {
	...
} foo = { 0, ... };
```

- however, this is unusual because structures are normally saved to header
  files, and including such a header file would mean a variable definition which
  is rarely desirable

- for better code readability and also to be able to search for the members in
  (large) code base, members are often prefixed with a common string ending with
  an underscore to denote their structure membership, e.g.:

```C
// 'sin' is a shortcut for 'Sockaddr_IN', the Internet socket
// address
struct sockaddr_in {
	short   sin_family;
	u_short sin_port;
};
```

- when looking for variable names in a big source code repository (using
  `ctags`, `cstyle` or tools such as
  [OpenGrok](https://github.com/opengrok/opengrok/)), there would be large
  amount of generally named variables like `port`, `size`, etc in various source
  code files.  However, with the prefix, like `sin_port`, very often you find
  just one, the one you are looking for.

## Struct layout in memory

```C
struct X { int a; char b; int c; };
```

- the offset of the first member will be always 0

- other members can be padded to preserve self-alignment (i.e. a member is
  always aligned in memory to multiple of its own size)
	- the value of the padding bits is undefined by definition and you must
	  not rely on it

- what will be the result of `sizeof (struct X)` above?
	- why? (think about efficiency of accessing members that cross
	  a word in memory)

- what if `char d` is added at the end of the data structure?
	- why is that? (think about arrays and memory access again)

- what if `char *d` is added at the end of the data structure?  (i.e. it will
  have 4 members)
	- assume this is being compiled on 64-bit machine
	- for efficiency the access to the pointer should be aligned to its size
	- if in doubt, draw a picture

```
+-----------+----+--------+------------+
|     a     | b  |   pad  |      c     |
+-----------+----+--------+------------+
```

- does the compiler reorder struct members?  No, C is designed to trust the
  programmer.

:eyes: [struct-X.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-X.c)

note: gcc/Clang has the `-fpack-struct` option that will condense the members at
the expense of speed when accessing them.  Use only when you know what you are
doing as it may not be safe on all architectures.

link: http://www.catb.org/esr/structure-packing/

## Struct members

- members are accessed via 2 operators: `.` and `->`
	- infix operators, left-to-right associativity, both are in the group of
	  operators with the highest precedence (priority)
	- `->` is used if the variable is a pointer, `.` otherwise

- e.g.:

```C
struct foo_s {
	int a;
	char b;
} foo;

foo.a = 42;
foo.b = 'C';
```

- the `.` and `->` operators have higher precedence than `*` and `&`, so:
  `&foo.b` gets the address of the member `b`

- structure assignment

```C
struct foo_s one, two;

one = two;
```

- is done byte by byte (shallow copy - does not follow pointers)
	- handy for members that are pointers
	- on the other hand for large structures (say hundreds of bytes) this
	  can be quite an expensive operation

- pointers to structures:
```C
struct foo_s *foo;

foo->a = 42;
foo->b = 'C';
```

:eyes: [struct-reference.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-reference.c)

:wrench: Task: write the above assignments to the members `a` and `b` using a
de-reference operator on `foo`

:key: [struct-access.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-access.c)

:wrench: now if `a` was a pointer to integer, how would the code change?

:key: [struct-access-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-access-ptr.c)

## Struct initialization

- can initialize a structure in its definition using the initiator list of
  **constant** values

```C
struct foo_s {
	int a;
	char b;
};

struct foo_s foo = { 1, 'C' };
```

:eyes: [struct-init.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-init.c)

- or using *designated initializers* from C99:

```C
struct foo_s foo = {
	.b = 'C',
	.a = 1,
};
```

- the ordering in the struct declaration does not have to be preserved (but you
  really should follow it though)

- omitted field members are implicitly initialized the same as objects that have
  static storage duration (ie. will be initialized to 0).

:eyes: [struct-designated-init.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-designated-init.c)

## Operations on structures

You can only:

- copy a structure
- assign to it as a unit
- taking its address with &
- access its members

So, structures cannot be:

- compared
- incremented (obviously)

## :wrench: Task: animals as structures

define array of structures of this type:

```C
struct animal {
	char name[NAME_MAX];	// max filename length should be sufficient
				// even for these long Latin names
	size_t legs;		// can have many legs
};
```

and initialize it with some samples (can define the array in `animals.h`) and
implement a function:

```C
size_t count_minlegs(struct animal *, size_t len, size_t min);
```

that will return number of animals in the array (of `len` items) that have at
least `min` legs.

Notice that the function returns `size_t`. This way it is ready for future
expansion. If it returned `unsigned int` and 32-bits was not found enough later
on, the prototype would have to be changed which would cause problems for the
consumers of this API.

The function will be implemented in a separate file.  (Do not forget to create a
header file(s).)

In the `main()` program (first program argument arg will specify the `min`
parameter of the function) pass the array of structs to the function and report
the result.

Note: will need:
  - `limits.h` for the `NAME_MAX` definition
  - `stddef.h` for `size_t` (as per C99, ยง7.17)

code:
  - :key: [struct-animals.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-animals.c)
  - :key: [animal\_minlegs.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal\_minlegs.c)
  - :key: [animal.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal.h)
  - :key: [animals.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animals.h)

Note: for compilation it is only necessary to compile the `*.c` files and then
link them together.

It can be done e.g. like this:

```
cc struct-animals.c animal_minlegs.c
```

where the compiler will do the compilation of the individual object files and
then call the linker to contruct the binary (named `a.out`).

Or as follows:

```
cc -c struct-animals.c animal_minlegs.c
cc -o animals struct-animals.o animal_minlegs.o
```

which is closer to what would be done using a Makefile.

Technically, `animals.h` contains code, however, given it is included in a `.c`
file it is not necessary to compile it individually.

:wrench: Task: use the code from previous task and implement (in separate `.c`
file)

```C
static size_t getlegs(struct animal *);
```

that will return number of legs for a given animal.


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

## animals: maximum number of legs

implement:
```C
      struct animal *maxlegs(struct animal *, size_t len);
```
that will use the `getlegs()` function and will return an animal with highest
leg count. Return pointer to the structure (= array element) from the function.

The `main()` function (in separate file) will define an array of animals and
will call `maxlegs()`.  The name of the animal with maximum number of legs will
be printed to standard output.

Note: does the original structure change if the structure returned from the
function was modified within the function? How to fix this ?

code:
  - :key: [animal\_maxlegs.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal\_maxlegs.c)
  - :key: [maxlegs.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/maxlegs.c)
  - :key: [animals.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animals.h)
  - :key: [animal.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal.h)

## :wrench: animal sorting

:wrench: Task: sort the array by number of legs, print it out to standard
output.

:wrench: Task: sort the array by the animal name. Print it out to standard
output.  Use `strcmp()` to do the comparison of names.

Make the comparison functions static.

Use the standard libc sort function qsort(3).  Check the manual page on how it's
used.  You will need to define a callback function that the qsort() function
will use to compare two array elements.

Make the program to accept an argument (0 or 1) and run the sorting function
based on that.

code:
  - :key: [animal-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal-sort.c)
  - :key: [animals.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animals.h)
  - :key: [animal.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/animal.h)


