# :wrench: warm-up strsepc

implement

```C
      char *strsepc(char **stringp, int c);
```

which behaves like strsep(3) except that it searches only for the first
occurence of a single character.

Try to use `strsep`() first :eyes: [strsep.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/strsep.c)

:key: [strsepc.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/strsepc.c)


# heap/dynamic allocation: malloc()/free()

The memory automatically allocated for local variables and function parameters
is allocated in an area called a *stack*. There is an area called a *heap* to
allocate memory that lasts after the function returns. This is also called
*dynamic allocation*.

The allocator in the standard C library offers the
`malloc`()/`calloc`()/`free`()/...  APIs for heap allocation.

:heavy\_exclamation\_mark: The `malloc`/`calloc` functions return a pointer to a
memory area of a specified size or a null pointer if the allocation failed -
always check that!  (even on Linux where it seems it can never fail - to be
prepared for change in a configuration and also for portability to systems with
more conservative memory allocation).

```C
#define	ARRLEN	20
int *p;

if ((p = malloc(ARRLEN * sizeof (int))) == NULL)
	err(1, "malloc");
p[0] = 99;
p[ARRLEN - 1] = 77;
```

The prototype for `malloc` is as follows:

```C
void *malloc(size_t size);
```

Note that as `malloc` returns `void *`, there is no need to explicitly type its
result when assigned to a pointer.  That is, do not use:

```C
int *p;

p = (int *)malloc(16);
```

See `man malloc` for more memory allocation related functions.

The C runtime does not have a garbage collector so all heap allocated memory
has to be explicitly freed via `free`() after it is no longer needed.

# Memory leaks

If memory allocated on the heap is not freed, it creates a resource leak called
a *memory leak* as the allocator deems such memory used even that your code no
longer uses it.

Depending on the size this might cause the problem of running out of memory
later on, and then `malloc`/`calloc` can start returning a null pointer.

The leaks can be checked using static or dynamic analyzers.

:wrench: write a program that takes all arguments that follow `argv[0]`,
concatenates them (without the terminating `NUL` character) into one string
dynamically allocated via `malloc`() and prints this string to the standard
output.

  - the concatenation can be done either by hand (try that first) or strncat()
    (try that afterwards)

:eyes: [argv-concat.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-concat.c)

You can then put the string processing in a loop and comment out the `free`()
call on the allocated memory.  Then check with `top -s 1` on Linux, macOS, or
any other Unix-like system (or use any other suitable system monitoring tool)
that the memory size of the running program quickly increases.

:eyes: [src/argv-concat-nofree.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/src/argv-concat-nofree.c)


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

# Linked list

Declare a structure that will form a simple linked list and will hold an integer
as a value.  The program will be run with a single argument specifying how many
items the list will have.

Allocate a new structure and insert into the head (global variable).  Each new
item will have its value incremented by one.

Aside from the value itself, each node needs to hold a pointer to the next
structure in the list.  The last node has the next pointer set as NULL.

Once the list is complete, print its value by traversing its items from head to
end.

```
$ ./a.out
a.out: usage: ./a.out <num>
$ ./a.out 10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
```

:key: code: :eyes: [linked-list-free.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linked-list-free.c)


# Pointer to a structure and type casting

- pointers to structures are often used to achieve common interface for
  different types

  - e.g.

```C
struct Common { int type; };
struct A      { int type; char data[8]; };	// type == 1
struct B      { int type; char data[16]; };	// type == 2
```

- then a function can be declared like so:

```C
int func(struct Common *c);
```

- internally it can do e.g.:

```C
if (c->type == 1) {
	struct A *ap = (struct A *)c;
	ap->data[7] = 'A';
} else if (c->type == 2) {
	struct B *bp = (struct B *)c;
	ap->data[15] = 'B';
}
```

This is possible since all the structures have the same member on the same
offset (that is offset 0).  However, note that you need to cast properly to
avoid warnings.  See the code below.

code: :eyes: [struct-common.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-common.c)

A function may also allocate an `A` or `B` structure and return its address as a
pointer to the `Common` struct.  This pointer then needs to be casted in the
caller according to its first member.

See `struct sockaddr`, `struct sockaddr_in` and `struct sockaddr_in6`
definitions as an example on how this is done in practice.


# Unions

- similar to structures however have different semantics
	- stores its members in the same memory location
	- allows for different "views" of the same data
- usually combined with structures
- handy for efficient data storage or HW programming

consider this declaration:
```C
union foo {
	unsigned short i; // 2 bytes
	struct {
		unsigned char low;
		unsigned char high;
	} bytes;
};
```
  - the `sizeof(union foo)` will be that of its largest member
  - modify a value of `i` and it will be reflected in the low/high values
    because `i` and `bytes` share the same location

```
		0             high memory addresses
		+-------------+
		|      i      |
		+-------------+
		| low  | high |
                +-------------+
```

- union can be part of a structure, :eyes: [union-in-struct.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-in-struct.c)
  and vice versa :eyes: [struct-in-union.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-in-union.c)
- union can be "anonymous" (e.g. no name inside of a structure), however this is
  non-standard just like for structures

:wrench: Task: use the above declaration to find out if the program is running
on big or little endian system (least significant byte is stored on lowest
address). The program will print either "big endian" or "little endian" to
standard output.

:key: [union-lowhigh.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-lowhigh.c)

# Storage classes

- two classes - *automatic* and *static*
- declaration within a block creates an automatic object.  Its storage is valid
  only within the very same block.
- the storage class determines the lifetime of the storage associated with the
  identified object
- only one storage class specifier may be given in a declaration
- objects declared outside of any block is always of the static storage class
  (e.g. global variables).
- static objects retain their value upon reentry to functions and blocks.
- you can initialize a static object.  The initialization happens just once.

:eyes: [fn-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-static-object.c)

This one also shows how to use `goto`.  More on that later.

:eyes: [block-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/block-static-object.c)

# Static variables and functions

- if a function is declared `static`, it is visible only from the same source
  code file

- static variables: retain value across function calls.  That is, the
  initialization of a static variable within a function is done only once.
- yes, the word `static` is overloaded in C

# Internal vs external linkage

Static objects with the keyword `static` are of internal linkage, meaning they
are not seen from other compilation units.  Static objects without the keyword
`static` are implicitly external.

Use `extern` keyword for objects that are defined in a different compilation
unit.

Example:

	$ cc linkage.c ext.c
	Undefined symbols for architecture x86_64:
	  "_si", referenced from:
	      _main in linkage-917564.o
	ld: symbol(s) not found for architecture x86_64
	clang: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see
	invocation)

:eyes: [linkage.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linkage.c)
:eyes: [ext.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ext.c)

Also note that each object must have exactly one definition.  For objects with
internal linkage, this rule applies separately to each translation unit, because
internally-linked objects are unique to a translation unit.

# Function pointers.

A function name is a pointer to the function.  You can pass it as an argument.

```C
int
myadd(int a, int b)
{
	return (a + b);
}

int
process_numbers(int a, int b, int (*f)(int, int))
{
	return ((*f)(a, b));
}
```

:eyes: [fn-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-ptr.c)

## :wrench: argv sorting

Use `qsort(3)` function to sort `argv`, and print it sorted then.  Check the man
page, you will need to write a function that can compare two elements of the
array you provide to the `qsort()` function.

First use `strcmp()` to sort the argument alphabetically, then use `atoi()` to
sort them numerically.

After that, come up with another way of sorting the arguments and write a
function for it as well.

:key: [argv-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-sort.c)
(for alphabetical sorting only)


# :wrench: Home assignment

Note that home assignments are entirely voluntary but writing code is the only
way to learn a programming language.

# `mygetopt`()

Implement a command line parser ala getopt(3). The global variable `myoptarg`
will be set if an option has an argument.

Note: call the function `mygetopt()` not to intermingle with the standard
library's `getopt()`.  Implement the "POSIXly correct solution", i.e. stop once
non-option argument is encountered (i.e. one not starting with `-`) or after the
`--` option is reached.

:wrench: bonus task: implement myoptind/myopterr/myoptopt variables

See the following code on how to use `getopt`(3):

https://github.com/devnull-cz/unix-linux-prog-in-c-src/blob/master/getopt/getopt.c

