# Unions

- similar to structures however have different semantics
	- stores its members in the same memory location
	- allows for different "views" of the same data
- usually combined with structures
- handy for efficient data storage or HW programming

consider this declaration:
```C
union foo {
	unsigned short i; // 2 bytes
	struct {
		unsigned char low;
		unsigned char high;
	} bytes;
};
```
  - the `sizeof(union foo)` will be that of its largest member
  - modify a value of `i` and it will be reflected in the low/high values
    because `i` and `bytes` share the same location

```
		0             high memory addresses
		+-------------+
		|      i      |
		+-------------+
		| low  | high |
                +-------------+
```

- union can be part of a structure, :eyes: [union-in-struct.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-in-struct.c)
  and vice versa :eyes: [struct-in-union.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/struct-in-union.c)
- union can be "anonymous" (e.g. no name inside of a structure), however this is
  non-standard just like for structures

:wrench: Task: use the above declaration to find out if the program is running
on big or little endian system (least significant byte is stored on lowest
address). The program will print either "big endian" or "little endian" to
standard output.

:key: [union-lowhigh.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/union-lowhigh.c)

# Storage classes

- two classes - *automatic* and *static*
- declaration within a block creates an automatic object.  Its storage is valid
  only within the very same block.
- the storage class determines the lifetime of the storage associated with the
  identified object
- only one storage class specifier may be given in a declaration
- objects declared outside of any block is always of the static storage class
  (e.g. global variables).
- static objects retain their value upon reentry to functions and blocks.
- you can initialize a static object.  The initialization happens just once.

:eyes: [fn-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-static-object.c)

This one also shows how to use `goto`.  More on that later.

:eyes: [block-static-object.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/block-static-object.c)

# Static variables and functions

- if a function is declared `static`, it is visible only from the same source
  code file

- static variables: retain value across function calls.  That is, the
  initialization of a static variable within a function is done only once.
- yes, the word `static` is overloaded in C

# Internal vs external linkage

Static objects with the keyword `static` are of internal linkage, meaning they
are not seen from other compilation units.  Static objects without the keyword
`static` are implicitly external.

Use `extern` keyword for objects that are defined in a different compilation
unit.

Example:

	$ cc linkage.c ext.c
	Undefined symbols for architecture x86_64:
	  "_si", referenced from:
	      _main in linkage-917564.o
	ld: symbol(s) not found for architecture x86_64
	clang: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see
	invocation)

:eyes: [linkage.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/linkage.c)
:eyes: [ext.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/ext.c)

Also note that each object must have exactly one definition.  For objects with
internal linkage, this rule applies separately to each translation unit, because
internally-linked objects are unique to a translation unit.

# Function pointers.

A function name is a pointer to the function.  You can pass it as an argument.

```C
int
myadd(int a, int b)
{
	return (a + b);
}

int
process_numbers(int a, int b, int (*f)(int, int))
{
	return ((*f)(a, b));
}
```

:eyes: [fn-ptr.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fn-ptr.c)

## :wrench: argv sorting

Use `qsort(3)` function to sort `argv`, and print it sorted then.  Check the man
page, you will need to write a function that can compare two elements of the
array you provide to the `qsort()` function.

First use `strcmp()` to sort the argument alphabetically, then use `atoi()` to
sort them numerically.

After that, come up with another way of sorting the arguments and write a
function for it as well.

:key: [argv-sort.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/argv-sort.c)
(for alphabetical sorting only)

