Lecture date: June 2, 2021

# `switch` statement

```C
switch (expression) {
	case constant1:
		// statements
		break;
	case constant2:
		// statements
		break;
	.
	.
	.
	default:
		// default statements
}
```

Each `case` is a label.  For that reason, you must `break` unless you want to
code fall through.  The reason for that is historical and time showed it was not
the right decision.

Very often used for command line option processing.

```C
int opt;

while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, "c:")) != -1) {
	switch (opt) {
	case 'c':
		/*
		 * optarg should be copied since it might be
		 * overwritten by another option or freed by getopt()
		 */
		if ((code = strdup(optarg)) == NULL)
			err(1, "cannot alloc memory for -c optarg");
		break;
	case '?':
		fprintf(stderr, "unknown option: '%c'\n", optopt);
		usage(argv0);
		break;
	}
}
```

# `goto` statement

Any statement may be preceded by a prefix that declares an identifier as a label
name.  Labels by themselves do not alter the flow of control.

Within the same function, you can jump to a label via the *goto* statement.

```C
int
main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	if (argc == 1)
		goto err;
	/* Process arguments here. */
	return (0);
err:
	errx(1, "missing arguments");
	return (1);
}
```

Use of `goto` in C is frown upon unless it is used to jump to an error/clean-up
section or break from structured code.  While even that use is questioned by
some, large number of major projects (Linux kernel code, OpenSSH, OpenSSL, etc.)
use it that way.  We strongly believe such use greatly simplifies the code.

Consider the following code **with conditionals that do not nest**.  It leads to
code duplication (or large amount of indentation to fix that):

```C
int
myfn(void)
{
	/* declarations ommited */

	if ((p = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		return (1);
	if ((p2 = malloc(16) == NULL) {
		free(p);
		return (1);
	}
	if ((p3 = malloc(16) == NULL) {
		free(p);
		free(p2);
		return (1);
	}
	if ((p4 = malloc(16) == NULL) {
		free(p);
		free(p2);
		free(p3);
		return (1);
	}
	/* etc... */

	printf("Success.\n");
	free(p);
	free(p2);
	free(p3);
	free(p4);
	/* ... */
	return (0);
}
```

With the conservative use of `goto`, we can simplify the code as follows:

```C
int
myfn(void)
{
	/* declarations ommited */

	int ret = 1;

	if ((p = malloc(16)) == NULL)
		return (1);
	if ((p2 = malloc(16) == NULL)
		goto err;
	if ((p3 = malloc(16) == NULL)
		goto err2;
	if ((p4 = malloc(16) == NULL)
		goto err3;
	/* etc... */

	/* Getting here means all went fine. */
	ret = 0;
	printf("Success.\n");

	free(p4);
err3:
	free(p3);
err2:
	free(p2);
err:
	free(p);
	return (ret);
}
```

The good thing is that you clean up at one common place, at the end of the
function.  If there is something new that needs to be cleaned up after the code
is enhanced, you just add it to the clean-up section.  In the former example,
you would have to check all error paths and modify those one by one.

**We definitely support reasonable use of `goto` for the clean-up and structured
code breaks**.  If used wisely it leads to cleaner code and saves lots of
intentation.  Also note that the `break` statement is a jump as well, and
imagine how to structure your code without it.

Also note that "any statement may be **preceded** by... a label".  As `case` is
a label as well (only valid within the `switch` statement though), you cannot
have a declaration right after the `case` label.  You also cannot have a label
right before a closing `}`.  So, a *null statement* to the rescue:

```C
switch (c) {
case 'a':
	;	/* must be here as a declaration is not a statement. */
	int a;
	/* ... */
default:
	;	/* must be here as the closing '}' is not a statement. */
}
```


# Debugging
## Debug prints

- the most primitive debugging technique is to insert debug prints
- `fprintf()`
  - do not use `printf()` for debugging unless you know what you are doing
    (stdout is cached in `libc`)
  - use a unique text for each debug text, for example:

```C
/* some code */
fprintf(stderr, "DBG 1\n");
/* some code */
fprintf(stderr, "DBG 2\n"); ...
/* some code */
fprintf(stderr, "DBG 3\n"); ...
...
```

- if you need to put another debug message in between 1 and 2, "1.5" seems like
  an easy way to do it.

## Asserts

- assert(3)
  - basic implementation of assert, provides the run-time condition checking
  - `#define NDEBUG` disables it.  Check the C spec for more information.
  - you need `<assert.h>`
  - `assert(0)` is of common use to bail out and to know where it did

Task: write a custom `assert`() macro that prints the line and file information
(using `__LINE__`, `__FILE__` pre-defined macros) and exits.

:eyes: [assert.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/assert.c)

- there is also `#error` pre-processor pragma that can be used to fail during
  the compilation phase

- there is `static_assert()` that is evaluated during compile time however this
  is available only in the C++0x standard
  - it can be handy for things (this is rather a hack) like:

```C
int i;

static_assert(sizeof (void *) >= sizeof (i));
foo((void *) i);
```

- in C99 we can use an array indexing with ternary operator as a check

:eyes: [static_assert.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/static_assert.c)

- to see how it works, run it through the pre-processor (use the `-E` compiler
  option or run `cpp` on the source file)

## System call tracing

- system calls: interface to the kernel to provide services like memory
  allocation, I/O, ...
- prints system call arguments, return values, timing information etc.
- this works by inserting break points or via dynamic instrumentation
  - the break points make the program slower, this overhead could be much larger
    than what is allowed in production

- basic tools:
  - `strace`/`truss`/`ltrace`
  - `dtrace` (dynamic tracing)

:wrench: Task: write a program that opens a file specified by the first argument
  of the program and reads a number of bytes specified by the second argument and
  writes them to standard output. Use `fopen`()/`fread`() without checking return
  values or error conditions.  What happens if the program tries to read files
  like `/etc/shadow` on Unix?  Run the program under `strace` to see possible
  clues. Refactor the program so that the I/O is performed in a function:

```C
static void file_read(char *file, size_t len);
```

Make the function perform in a cycle with 16k iterations and run the program
with `/etc/passwd` as the argument.

Again run the program under `strace` to see possible clues.

:wrench: Now fix the program so that:
   - it properly detects all errors
   - the function can be called arbitrary number of times (in a sequence)

:eyes: [file-open.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/file-open.c)

## Static analysis

- compile time warnings are inherently limited
  - however, they can report on wide range of errors (format strings, offer
    missing include files, detect simple buffer overflows, ...)

:eyes: [fmt-string-invalid.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/fmt-string-invalid.c)
:eyes: [buf-overflow.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/buf-overflow.c)

- it fails to cover some corner cases

- static analysis tools hook into compiler and can follow all code paths
  - by constructing graph of code blocks
  - this is useful also for *taint analysis* - following potentially
    unsanitized data input across all code paths to determine if it can be used
    to exploit code deficiencies
  - the method has its drawbacks - false positives, can be foiled sometimes
    because it does not understand enough context and program internals

- clang: the `scan-build` script is a front-end to the library performing
  checks, accepts compilation line as argument
 - the compilation line can be a simple compiler invocation and also `make`

:eyes: [buf-overflow-func.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/buf-overflow-func.c)

- when compiled with `-Wall -Wextra` no warnings/errors are reported
- when run, it usually does (depends on compiler/system) not produce any
  warnings and happily prints the corrupted array
  - try to compile with `-DBUFFER_SIZE=128` and the result might be different
    due to stack smashing detection supplied by the compiler
    - if the program is compiled with `-fno-stack-protector`, the stack canary
      is not added and the program usually exits with a segmentation fault
    - try with different compilers (`gcc`, `clang`)

Run: `scan-build clang buf-overflow.c`

Note: works with `gcc` too

:wrench: Task: write a program that accesses memory allocated on the heap after
it is freed. See if the `scan-build` static analyzer can detect it.  Modify the
program to return the allocated memory from a function and then free + modify it
in `main`().  Does `scan-build` still detect this use-after-free bug?

:eyes: [use-after-free.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/use-after-free.c)

## Library call tracing

- `ltrace` is the most widely used tool to print calls to library functions
  - it can provide indentation (`-n`)
  - can be used to do simple profiling (with `-tt`)
- to print calls within the program itself use `-e @MAIN`
  - in a different tool, `truss` (Solaris, \*BSD), one can do that with `-u
    a.out`

:eyes: [recurs.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/recurs.c)
  - run with: `ltrace -n4 -L ./a.out 5`

Note: `ltrace` can trace system calls as well with the `-S` option

Links:
  - http://techblog.rosedu.org/ltrace.html
  - https://blog.packagecloud.io/eng/2016/03/14/how-does-ltrace-work/

## Dynamic analysis

- run-time analysis performed by running the program in an emulation layer
  (virtual machine), intercepting calls to memory allocator etc.
- can provide more detailed detection at the cost of performance and coverage -
  can detect only in the code paths actually executed (compared to static
  analysis)
  - the performance degradation incurred by dynamic analysis is usually
    much higher than the one of syscall/library tracing

:wrench: Task: Take a look at the code and try to find as many bugs as possible:
:eyes: [shell.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/shell.c)

Then compile the program with as many checks as possible and run the
program through the static analysis.

Then run it through Valgrind, perform couple of operations and exit the
program, i.e.

1. `valgrind ./a.out`
1. echo couple of "commands"
1. hit Ctrl-C

Also run it automatically, e.g.:

```
$ cat << EOF >/tmp/input
foo
bar
foo bar
EOF
$ valgrind ./a.out < /tmp/input
```

- try to compile the program with debug info (`-g`) and re-run valgrind with
  `--leak-check=full` and see the difference in the output.
- fix the program and re-run the test(s) again

## Dynamic tracing

- `dtrace` / SystemTap
- should have minimal overhead, mostly can be run on production systems
- provides syscall/library tracing as well as variety of other insights into
  the system (neworking abstractions, CPU performance counters/cache analysis,
  ...)
- allows to ask (before unheard of) questions that could not be answered before
  - e.g. what process is stressing particular disk with I/O, what are the most
    contributing processes that send TCP traffic to port X and what are their
    most frequently executed stack traces, ...

## Debugger

- can be used for both live debugging and post-mortem analysis (from a core file
  produced by the program)
  - works by inserting breakpoints and displaying memory of the process
    - this is usually done using the ptrace(2) syscall
- most common debuggers: `gdb`, `lldb`, `dbx`, `mdb`
  - some of them have the concept of plug-ins

- compiling binaries for the debugging: the `-g` compiler option adds debugging
  information to the resulting binary, in particular mapping of assembly
  instructions to the source code lines
  - one can debug without this data, just some assembly knowledge is required

- will describe `gdb` here

- compile and run the program from gdb:
```
cc -Wall -g random.c
gdb ./a.out
> r
```

- exiting the debugger:

```
> quit
```

  - or Ctrl-D

- to get the core file, the system limit for core file may need to be bumped.
  Also note that different systems have different ways of how they process core
  files.

```
ulimit -c 1000000
```

  - and re-run the program again

- display the stack trace at the moment of breakpoint stop/crash:

```
> backtrace
```

- see where exactly it crashed:

```
> disassembly
> info reg
> list
```

- insert breakpoint

```
> b main
> b run
```

  - can also insert breakpoint to particular line (if the program was compiled
    with line information):

```
> b 8
```

  - print breakpoints:

```
> info breakpoints
```

- stepping
  - single line (assembly instruction) stepping:

```
> next
```

  - step through:

```
> step
```

- printing memory

  - print variable value:

```
> print idx
> print p
```

  - can use the usual dereference/ref operators:
    (once inside run())

```
> print *p[idx]
```

- print a variable in each step:

```
> display i
```

  - to disable the printing:

```
> delete display i
```

- breakpoints can be conditional:

```
> break 14 if i == idx
```


# :wrench: Warm-up/home task: alternating bits detection

Task: detect if an integer has alternating bits, e.g. `10101`

Note: this can be done in O(1) time using bit operations + arithmetics

# :wrench: Warm-up: Number of bits for binary representation

Given an `int` (assume 4 bytes) with a positive value, use bit operators to find
out how many bits (and bytes) will be needed to represent the number in binary.
Then rewrite
:eyes: [print-in-binary.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/print-in-binary.c)
using the acquired number.

Note: be careful about little vs big endian


# Building with a concrete C specification version

If you want to make sure your code is built following a concrete C version, it
has two parts:

- you must request the C specification version in your C code
- you need an implementation (compiler, linker, ...) that supports the version
  you want

## Limiting your code to the specific C spec version

In [C89](http://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c89-draft.html), there was no
`__STDC_VERSION__` macro (note there are two underscores both leading and
terminating the macro).  In the [Normative Addendum
1](http://port70.net/~nsz/c/c89/c94_na1.html) for C89 from 1994, the macro was
defined with a value of `199409L`.  In the [C99
specification](http://port70.net/~nsz/c/c99/n1256.pdf) (there is also a [handy
txt only version](http://port70.net/~nsz/c/c99/n1256.txt), the macro has a value
of `199901L`.

So, if you want your compiler to use a minimal or a specific C version, work
with the macro and `#ifdef` and `#error` preprocessor directives.

```C
#ifndef __STDC_VERSION__
#error "__STDC_VERSION__ not defined.  C99 compiler or greater required."
#else
#if __STDC_VERSION__ < 199901L
#error "C99 compiler or greater required."
#endif
#endif
```

:eyes: [check-c-version.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/check-c-version.c)

:eyes: [request-c99.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/request-c99.c)

## Compiler version

In the [1997: Single UNIX Specification (SUS) version
2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_UNIX_Specification#1997:_Single_UNIX_Specification_version_2),
with systems supporting that version as UNIX98, the compiler binary supporting
C89 had to be named `c89`.  You can [search SUS ver 2
here](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/7990989775/), and type `c89`.

In
[POSIX:2004](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_UNIX_Specification#2004:_POSIX:2004),
which is SUS ver 3 with updates, the C compiler binary supporting C99 standard
had to be named `c99`.  The [latest SUS
version](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/) (as of May, 2020)
still defines `c99`.  I expect the future SUS versions with require `c11` binary
to support C11 standard.

TODO: c89 on macOS, gcc -std=c99, c89 on macOS with `_Bool`

Might be difficult to get the compiler work as the exact specification version.
For example, the following will compile while `//` are not part of C89, and
moreover, `_Bool` is not either and it does not issue even a warning.

```
janp:air:~$ cat main.c
int
main(void)
{
	// not in C89
	_Bool b;
}
$ c89 main.c
main.c:4:2: warning: // comments are not allowed in this language [-Wcomment]
        // not in C89
        ^
1 warning generated.
$ gcc -std=c89 -pedantic main.c
main.c:4:2: warning: // comments are not allowed in this language [-Wcomment]
        // not in C89
        ^
1 warning generated.
```

# Flexible array member

- since C99 (ยง6.7.2.1, item 16, page 103)
- it is an array without a dimension specified as the **last member** of the
  structure
  - handy for structures with a fixed header and some "padding" data of flexible
    length that is allocated dynamically
  - why not to use a pointer instead?  It is good when passing data over
    boundaries such as network, kernel/userland, etc. since no structure
    copy is required.
    - just copy the structure as a whole (however, it is necessary to know how
      large is the padding) because it is all contiguous memory
- `sizeof (the_structure)` gives you the size of the structure **as if
  the flexible array was empty**.

Example:

```C
struct item {
	int value;
	// possible other members
	char payload[];
	// nothing can follow
};
```

`sizeof (struct item)` will give the size **without the last member computed**

```
+-------------+-----------------------+
| struct item |      payload ...      |
+-------------+-----------------------+
```

Previously, this was hacked around using array with 0 members and GCC accepted
this.  Since C99 this can be done properly using this technique.

The extra data is allocated as follows:

```C
struct item *p = malloc(sizeof (struct item) + payload_len * sizeof (p->payload[0]));
```

- with this approach the overall structure alignment might be lost
  - i.e. it is necessary to set the payload length according to the size
    of the structure if you want to maintain the alignment

:eyes: [flexible-array-member.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/flexible-array-member.c)

# Structure bit fields

- sometimes memory is scarce (imagine having to keep millions of big structures
  in memory) and there are members holding integer values that occupy just a
  couple of bytes
  - *bit fields* can be used to shrink the memory needed

```C
struct foo {
	unsigned int a : 3;
	unsigned int b : 1;
	unsigned int   : 4;
};
```

- the number after the colon specifies the number of bits for a given bit field
  - cannot exceed the size of the underlying data type (`unsigned int` in the
    above example)
- you cannot use `sizeof` on a bit field

- this is good for implementing network protocol headers or HW registers,
  however the layout of bit fields in a C structure is implementation dependant
  - if it needs to match a concrete layout, additional non-standard compiler
    features have to be used (`#pragma`'s etc.)
  - there is no `offsetof()` for bit fields

:eyes: [bitfield.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitfield.c)

- the integer values will behave as expected, e.g.

```C
struct foo_s {
	unsigned int a : 3;
} foo;

foo.a = 7;
foo.a++; // will wrap around to 0 since this is unsigned
```

:eyes: [bitfield-wraparound.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/bitfield-wraparound.c)

# Non-transparent handles may cause issues

If your library is statelful, the state is often managed by a handle
used as an argument in the library function calls.  Let's say internally in the
library we need to track some ID and a position.  Those members are expected to
be used only by the library itself so the consumers of the library should use
the handle in a transparent way.   That is, they should not care nor use
whatever is inside the handle.

```C
/* mylib.h */
struct ml_hndl {
	int ml_id;
	int ml_pos;
};

/* mylib.c */
struct handle *
ml_init(void)
{
	/* allocate and init the handle first */
	/* ... */

	return (h);
}

/* mylib.c continues */
enum ml_err
ml_parse(struct handle *h, char *url)
{
	enum ml_err e = ML_OK;

	/* parse the URI */
	/* ... */

	return (e);
}

/* ... */
```

And the consumer would use it as follows:

```C
#include <mylib.h>

int
main(void)
{
	ml_err ret;
	struct ml_hndl *h;

	h = ml_init(void);
	if ((ret = ml_parse(h, "some URI")) != ML_OK)
		errx(1, "...");

	/* ... */
}
```

So far, so good.  However, what if the consumer code delves into the handle and
uses the information in there (because the header file is part of the library
and available to the consumer)?

```C
int
main(void)
{
	/* ... */

	print_debug("[Debug] handle ID: %d\n", h->md_id);

	/* ... */
}
```

This will work fine until the library provider changes the handle (believed to
be internal to the library):

```C
/* mylib.h */
struct ml_hndl {
	long long ml_id;	/* used to be an int */
	int ml_pos;
};
```

Unless the consumer code is recompiled after the change, which may not happen as
it could be some 3rd party software bought by the customer years ago, the debug
print is now incorrect as it only prints the first 4 bytes of the structure, not
8.

There are ways to mitigate that:

- use something non-revealing as a handle, like in index to the internal array
  of structures that keep the states.  That is possible but you now need to
  manage the internal structure that keeps the state structures.  You also
  cannot change the index type unless you recompile all the consumers as well.
- the library provider could use something called *incomplete types* and use
  them to provide an opaque (transparent) handle.

# Incomplete types

An *incomplete type* is a type that describes an object but lacks information
needed to determine its size.  You cannot declare objects using such types as
the lack of the size prevents to allocated memory for them on the stack or heap.

```
$ cat main.c
struct x a;	/* declaring a variable using a structure of an unknown size */

int
main(void)
{
}

$ cc main.c
main.c:1:10: error: tentative definition has type 'struct x' that is never
      completed
struct x a;
         ^
main.c:1:8: note: forward declaration of 'struct x'
struct x a;
       ^
1 error generated.
```

The `x` structure could be completed, for all declarations of that type, by
declaring the same structure tag with its defining content later in the same
scope.  We could only *forward declare* the structure though (that is, no
defining any object of that structure type).

As we do not need to know the size of the `x` structure, the following code
compiles.

```
$ cat main.c
struct x;	/* this is called forward declaration */

int
main(void)
{
}

$ cc main.c
$ echo $?
0
```

BTW, the `void` type is an incomplete type that can be never completed.  So, you
cannot declare a variable of type `void`.

```C
$ cat main.c
int
main(void)
{
	void x;
}

$ cc main.c
main.c:4:7: error: variable has incomplete type 'void'
        void x;
             ^
1 error generated.
```

However, you can always declare and work with a pointer to an incomplete type
(all structures are always aligned to the same byte boundary).  The following
will compile and run fine.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

struct x *
myfn(struct x *p)
{
        return (p);
}

int
main(void)
{
        myfn(NULL);
}
```

This feature of the C language can be used to represent opaque handles, and
those can be used to solve the
[problem with non-transparent handles](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/modules/non-transparent-handles.md)
.

# Opaque structures (handles)

With the help of incomplete types, it is possible to declare a structure in a
header file along with API that consumes it without revealing what the structure
actually contains.  The reason to do that is not to allow a programmer to depend
(= use) on the structure members, thus allowing to change the structure innards
anytime.

```C
/* Forward declaration in foo.h */
struct foo;

void
do_stuff(struct foo *f);
```

The file implementing `do_stuff()` **will retype the opaque structure object to
an internal structure type**.

```C
/* in foo_impl.h not provided to the consumers */
struct foo_impl {
    int x;
    int y;
};

/* library implementation code */
void
do_stuff(struct foo *f)
{
	struct foo_impl *fi = (struct foo_impl *)f;

	fi->x = ...
	fi->y = ...
}
```

Then any `.c` file that includes `foo.h` can work with the structure
(by passing it to `do_stuff()`) however cannot access its members directly.
The structure is usable only via a pointer. Thus, the library has to provide
a function to allocate a structure and return the pointer to it
(and possibly also to initialize it) and functions to get/set the data
inside the structure.

This is handy for libraries so they are free to change the layout of structures
without breaking the consumers.

The consumer of the library then `#include`s only `foo.h` but it does not have
access to `foo_impl.h`.

```C
#include <stdio.h>

#include "foo.h"

int
main(void)
{
	struct foo *h;

	h = getFoo();
	doStuff(h);
}
```

:eye:
  - :eyes: [foo.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/foo.h)
  - :eyes: [foo\_impl.h](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/foo\_impl.h)
  - :eyes: [foo.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/foo.c)
  - :eyes: [foo-consumer.c](https://github.com/devnull-cz/c-prog-lang/blob/master/src/foo-consumer.c)

