# recap of the first class

- make sure you **do subscribe to the mailing list** (see http://mff.devnull.cz/c-prog-lang
  on how to do that).  If you miss some information posted to the mailing
  list because you are not subscribed, it is your problem :-)

- in general, use internet search to get information if unsure
  - https://stackoverflow.com has lots of good discussions on C corner cases etc.

- assignment from the previous class: moving star on the console
	- our solution (we strongly recommend you code it first by yourself) is
	  in [moving-star.c](/src/moving-star.c)

# warmup

Print conversion table for https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ell (rope length
used by Frodo and Sam in The Lord of the Rings had some 30 ells) to inches
and centimeters, i.e. table with 3 columns separated by tabs.

Print the centimeter value as float with 2 digit precision.

Each 10 lines print a line (sequence of `-` characters, say 20 times).
The line will immediately follow the table header and then will appear
each 10 lines. Use `while` cycle to print the line.

Print 30 of numeric rows.

Sample output:

```
Ell	Inches	Centimeters
--------------------
1	45	114.30
2	90	228.60
3	135	342.90
4	180	457.20
5	225	571.50
6	270	685.80
7	315	800.10
8	360	914.40
9	405	1028.70
10	450	1143.00
--------------------
11	495	1257.30
12	540	1371.60
13	585	1485.90
14	630	1600.20
15	675	1714.50
16	720	1828.80
17	765	1943.10
18	810	2057.40
19	855	2171.70
20	900	2286.00
--------------------
21	945	2400.30
22	990	2514.60
23	1035	2628.90
24	1080	2743.20
25	1125	2857.50
26	1170	2971.80
27	1215	3086.10
28	1260	3200.40
29	1305	3314.70
30	1350	3429.00
```

#include "modules/scm.md"
#include "modules/comments.md"
#include "modules/preprocessor.md"
#include "modules/expressions.md"
#include "modules/break.md"
#include "modules/operators.md"
#include "modules/boolean.md"
#include "modules/numbers.md"
#include "modules/sizeof.md"
#include "modules/conversion.md"
#include "modules/getchar.md"

# Home assignments

These are voluntary but writing code is the only way to learn a programming
language.

#include "modules/count-digit-occurence.md"
#include "modules/toupper.md"
